1
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
REenergizeME: intermittent hypoxia–
hyperoxia treatment for myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome—protocol for a randomised, 
placebo-­controlled trial
Mastaneh Nochi  ‍ ‍ ,1,2 Sophie Kjerstein Kristensen,3 Niloufar Mehrani,4 
Inês Guerreiro,1 Ida Marie Dahl Nørholm,1 Shreyas Chandra  ‍ ‍ ,1 Mette Olufsen,5 
Louise Rindel Gudbergsen,4 Louise Schouborg Brinth,6 Rasmus Stokholm,3 
Pall Karlsson  ‍ ‍ ,2 Hatice Tankisi,7 Jesper Mehlsen,8 Casper Bindzus Foldager,3 
Rikke Katrine Jentoft Olsen1
To cite: Nochi M, Kristensen SK, 
Mehrani N, et al. REenergizeME: 
intermittent hypoxia–hyperoxia 
treatment for myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome—protocol 
for a randomised, placebo-­
controlled trial. BMJ Open 
2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2026-117729
	
►Prepublication history 
and additional supplemental 
material for this paper are 
available online. To view these 
files, please visit the journal 
online (https://doi.org/10.1136/​
bmjopen-2026-117729).
Received 01 February 2026
Accepted 24 July 2026
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Rikke Katrine Jentoft Olsen;  
​rikke.​olsen@​clin.​au.​dk and  
Dr Mastaneh Nochi;  
​nochi@​clin.​au.​dk
Protocol
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2026. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No 
commercial re-­use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ Group.
ABSTRACT
Introduction  Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a chronic, disabling 
condition characterised by post-­exertional malaise 
(PEM), autonomic dysfunction and markedly reduced 
quality of life. Its prevalence has increased following 
the COVID-­19 pandemic, yet no effective disease-­
modifying treatments are available and underlying 
mechanisms remain unclear. Evidence implicates 
immune-­metabolic dysregulation, impaired energy 
metabolism, vascular dysfunction and altered oxygen 
handling. Intermittent hypoxia-­hyperoxia treatment 
(IHHT) is a non-­pharmacological intervention 
proposed to induce adaptive physiological and cellular 
responses via hypoxia- and redox-­sensitive pathways. 
This trial evaluates the clinical efficacy of IHHT in ME/
CFS and explores associated mechanisms.
Methods and analysis  This randomised, placebo-­
controlled, participant- and assessor-­blinded clinical 
trial will enrol 104 female patients aged 20–59 years 
who meet the International Consensus Criteria for  
ME/CFS along with a healthy control group for 
mechanistic comparisons. Participants will be 
randomised 1:1 to IHHT or placebo following baseline 
assessments. The intervention will be delivered 
over 8 weeks. The primary endpoint is change in 
quality of life measured by the vitality domain of the 
Short Form-­36 Health Survey. Secondary endpoints 
include PEM severity, fatigue severity, cognitive 
severity, functional capacity and autonomic symptoms 
assessed using validated patient-­reported outcome 
measures and objective tests. Exploratory endpoints 
include pain phenotyping, autonomic, sudomotor and 
neurophysiological assessments, tissue oxygenation 
by near-­infrared spectroscopy, peripheral small-­fibre 
nerve assessments using corneal confocal microscopy 
and skin biopsy and immune-­metabolic and oxidative 
stress biomarkers. Assessments will be conducted at 
baseline; post-­treatment; and at 3, 6 and 12 months 
follow-­up.
Ethics and dissemination  The trial is conducted in 
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and International 
Council for Harmonisation – Good Clinical Practice guidelines 
and was approved by the Danish Scientific Ethical Committees 
(De Videnskabsetiske Medicinske Komitéer, VMK; approval 
no. 2500959). Written informed consent will be obtained from 
all participants. Results will be disseminated through peer-­
reviewed publications and scientific conferences.
Trial registration number  ​ClinicalTrials.​gov Identifier: 
NCT07317401.
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
	
⇒Randomised, placebo-­controlled, participant- and 
assessor-­blinded clinical trial conducted in compli-
ance with International Council for Harmonisation – 
Good Clinical Practice guidelines.
	
⇒Comprehensive assessment strategy combining 
patient-­reported outcomes with objective physio-
logical, neurobiological and molecular measures, 
including autonomic testing, tissue oxygenation, 
peripheral small-­fibre nerve assessments and 
immune-­metabolic profiling.
	
⇒The intervention protocol and sample size are based 
on prior experience and data from related post-­viral 
fatigue conditions rather than on a dedicated pilot 
trial in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS).
	
⇒Participants are recruited from specialised clinical 
settings, which may limit generalisability to individ-
uals with milder disease or shorter symptom dura-
tion or those with severe disease who are bedbound 
and therefore unable to participate in the study 
procedures.
	
⇒The inclusion of female participants only reflects 
the higher prevalence of ME/CFS in women and im-
proves cohort homogeneity but limits the generalis-
ability of the findings to male patients.

2
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
INTRODUCTION
Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME), also referred to as 
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), is a chronic, debili-
tating neurological disorder in which post-­exertional 
malaise (PEM) is the cardinal feature. PEM is defined as a 
prolonged worsening of symptoms—including cognitive 
and physical fatigue, pain and autonomic disturbances—
triggered by minimal physical, cognitive or orthostatic 
stress.1 2 Globally, ME/CFS is estimated to affect approx-
imately 0.5%–1.0% of the population, corresponding to 
tens of millions of individuals worldwide.3–5 In Denmark, 
approximately 16 000 individuals are diagnosed with the 
condition, and patients experience greater functional 
impairment than those with depression, multiple scle-
rosis or stroke.6 Importantly, population-­based studies 
following the COVID-­19 pandemic indicate that the 
risk of developing ME/CFS or ME/CFS-­like illness has 
increased substantially after SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, with 
estimates suggesting up to a fivefold higher incidence 
compared with non-­infected populations.7–9 Despite its 
substantial personal, social and economic impact, no 
effective treatment is currently available, and the under-
lying pathophysiology remains poorly understood.
The post-­infectious syndrome known as long COVID 
shares substantial clinical and biological overlap with ME/
CFS, including PEM, fatigue, myalgia, cognitive impair-
ment (‘brain fog’) and autonomic disturbances.10–12 
Increasing evidence indicates that both conditions share 
a post-­infectious, immune-­mediated pathophysiology 
and are characterised by vascular, immune, metabolic 
and neuropathic dysfunction domains. Although the 
drivers of these interacting pathophysiological domains 
remain unclear, persistent immune activation, chronic 
viral reactivation, autoimmunity and mitochondrially 
controlled inflammatory and redox abnormalities have 
been proposed as potential contributors.10–12
Functional autoantibodies targeting adrenergic, musca-
rinic and endothelin receptors have been identified in a 
significant proportion of patients. These autoantibodies 
may disrupt vascular tone, microcirculatory perfusion and 
autonomic signalling, thereby contributing to impaired 
cardiovascular regulation and altered control of oxygen 
delivery and utilisation within the neurovascular and 
neuromuscular microenvironment.13–20
The resulting hypoxic environment may induce mito-
chondrial remodelling, reduce metabolic flexibility and 
exacerbate oxidative stress and inflammation. Oxidative 
damage, including lipid peroxidation, further impairs 
endothelial function, red blood cell deformability and 
microvascular perfusion, all of which have been observed 
in patients with ME/CFS.15 21–25 Periodic disturbances in 
oxygen delivery to brain and muscle tissues may there-
fore trigger recurrent episodes of mild hypoxic injury, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and inflam-
mation, collectively contributing to PEM. This mech-
anism may explain why even minimal activity above an 
individual’s threshold provokes disproportionate fatigue 
and pain in ME/CFS. Despite heterogeneity in specific 
pathophysiological markers, evidence of oxidative stress, 
mitochondrial 
metabolic 
alterations, 
microvascular 
changes, impaired blood flow and autonomic dysfunction 
in ME/CFS, and more recently in long COVID, is abun-
dant and shows a recurring pattern.1 8 11 12 15 21 22 24–31
Given the rising prevalence of long COVID and the 
chronic, disabling nature of ME/CFS, the associated 
public health and economic burden is expected to 
increase substantially, underscoring the urgent need 
for novel therapeutic strategies.32 Intermittent hypoxia-­
hyperoxia treatment (IHHT) represents a promising 
approach by directly targeting several of the pathophys-
iological mechanisms implicated in ME/CFS. IHHT 
involves repeated cycles of hypoxic and hyperoxic expo-
sure, which enhance hypoxia tolerance through activa-
tion of redox-­sensitive cellular stress-­response pathways, 
including mitochondrial antioxidant and repair pathways 
to improve mitochondrial function and reduce oxidative 
and inflammatory stress.33–35 At mild, hormetic levels, 
hypoxia stabilises hypoxia-­inducible factor 1 alpha,36 
leading to the transcription of genes involved in eryth-
ropoiesis, angiogenesis, vascular blood flow regulation 
and metabolism, thereby promoting physiological and 
cellular adaptation to hypoxic stress.34 35 37 38 Two studies 
applying IHHT and one study using intermittent hypoxia 
treatment in patients with long COVID have reported 
favourable safety profiles and improvements in self-­
reported fatigue, pain and functional capacity, along 
with improvements in exercise performance, inflamma-
tory markers and autonomic function in non-­placebo-­
controlled patient cohorts. 39–41We hypothesise that IHHT 
preconditions brain and muscle tissues to tolerate recur-
rent mild hypoxic stress, thereby improving PEM, auto-
nomic regulation of cardiovascular and metabolic energy 
function and overall quality of life in patients with ME/
CFS. Furthermore, we expect that clinical and functional 
improvement will correspond with enhanced microvas-
cular function and changes in systemic immune–meta-
bolic and oxidative stress biomarkers. Accordingly, the 
objective of this trial is to evaluate the clinical efficacy of 
IHHT in ME/CFS and to explore its effects on autonomic 
function and underlying immune–metabolic, vascular 
and neuropathic mechanisms. The broader perspective is 
to generate new hypotheses about ME/CFS disease mech-
anisms and, if the trial demonstrates positive effects, to 
inform the development of future IHHT protocols. The 
primary endpoint is quality of life, specifically the vitality 
domain of the self-­reported Short Form-­36 Health Survey 
(SF-­36) questionnaire, which focuses on energy level and 
fatigue. Secondary endpoints include other measures of 
clinical improvement, such as the physical role domain 
of the SF-­36, PEM severity (assessed using the Functional 
Capacity (FUNCAP) questionnaire alongside cogni-
tive and hand-­grip strength tests), autonomic function 
(assessed using the Composite Autonomic Symptom 
Score-­31 (COMPASS-­31) questionnaire, electrocardio-
graphic data and heart-­rate variability during orthostatic 
stress testing and Valsalva manoeuvre) and pain severity 

3
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
(assessed using the painDETECT questionnaire and 
detailed pain assessment - including pain mapping and 
sensory examination). Explorative endpoints comprise 
complementary assessments of underlying disease mech-
anisms to identify potential biological and functional 
response patterns. These include corneal confocal 
microscopy (CCM) and skin biopsy to quantify nerve-­
fibre density, macrophages, mitochondria and vascular 
structures, tissue oxygenation assessed by near-­infrared 
spectroscopy (NIRS) and cellular and plasma biomarkers, 
to capture mitochondrial, vascular and oxidative/inflam-
matory stress markers.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Trial design
This study is a prospective, randomised, placebo-­
controlled, participant- and assessor-­blinded clinical trial. 
Participant recruitment is planned to commence in June 
2026, with final follow-­up and completion of data collec-
tion anticipated in January 2029. The study comprises a 
screening visit, a baseline assessment visit, six treatment 
sessions and one post-­treatment follow-­up visit.
During screening, participants will be evaluated for 
eligibility according to predefined inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria. Individuals meeting all criteria will proceed 
to the baseline assessment. If temporary exclusion criteria 
are identified, participants may still be included provided 
these are re-­evaluated and resolved before treatment 
initiation. The maximum interval between screening and 
treatment commencement is 7 weeks.
Eligible participants will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio 
to receive either an IHHT protocol or a sham protocol. 
Block randomisation will be used, stratified by age, 
disease duration and disease severity, classified according 
to the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) guidelines for ME/CFS.
Participants will receive six treatment sessions over 
8 weeks. Treatments will be administered by trained staff 
members who are not involved in outcome assessment, 
data collection or data analysis. Outcome assessors and 
investigators responsible for data analysis will remain 
blinded to treatment allocation. Participants will be 
blinded to treatment allocation throughout the study.
To minimise bias, treatment staff will not be involved in 
clinical assessments and will refrain from discussing treat-
ment allocation or hypotheses with participants.
The success of blinding will be evaluated after comple-
tion of the intervention. Participants will be asked to indi-
cate whether they believe they received active IHHT or 
sham treatment and to specify the reason for their belief 
(eg, perceived effects, side effects or other cues such as 
sensory experiences or staff interaction).
Detailed procedures for randomisation, allocation 
concealment and blinding are defined in the study 
protocol and operational procedures.
The post-­treatment follow-­up visit will take place no 
earlier than 2 weeks after the final treatment session. 
Participants will additionally be invited to complete 
online self-­reported follow-­up questionnaires at 3, 6 and 
12 months post-­intervention.
A schematic overview of the trial design is shown in 
figure 1.
Patient and public involvement
The trial design was discussed with and informed by a 
patient advisory board, including representatives from 
the Danish ME Association (ME Foreningen). The advi-
sory board provided input on the relevance and feasibility 
of the study design.
Setting
This investigator-­initiated trial will be conducted at 
Aarhus University Hospital in collaboration with Remed-
ical.Me ApS and SANA Medical Systems, all located in 
Denmark. The trial sponsor is Aarhus University, in part-
nership with the Central Denmark Region represented by 
Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Patients diagnosed with ME/CFS will be identified 
through the patient registry at Remedical.Me ApS, and 
eligible individuals will be contacted via email. Addi-
tional participants will be recruited through advertise-
ments distributed via the Danish ME Association (ME 
Foreningen), the Danish COVID Association (Dansk 
Figure 1  Trial flowchart.

4
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Covidforening) and social media platforms. Healthy 
controls will be recruited through public advertise-
ments, including posts on social media (eg, Facebook 
and LinkedIn), the Danish ME Association’s and Danish 
COVID Association’s websites, and local networks at 
Aarhus University Hospital.
Baseline and post-­treatment assessments will be 
conducted at Aarhus University Hospital, while treat-
ment sessions will be administered at SANA Medical 
Systems’ HypoxBreath facilities in Risskov and Copen-
hagen. All participants, whether in the intervention or 
control group, will receive treatment under the supervi-
sion of intensivists and nurses specially trained in IHHT 
procedures.
The funders had no role in the design of the study; 
collection, analysis or interpretation of data; writing of 
the manuscript; or the decision to submit the protocol 
for publication.
Trial population
The study will recruit at least 104 female patients aged 
20–59 years who meet the International Consensus 
Criteria for ME/CFS.42 Eligible participants must have a 
disease duration exceeding 6 months and a documented 
history of PEM. Only individuals classified with mild to 
moderate disease severity according to the NICE guide-
lines43 will be included.
Participants with other clinically significant chronic 
psychiatric, neurological, cardiovascular, metabolic or 
systemic diseases not considered part of their ME/CFS 
will be excluded, in order to minimise confounding and 
ensure participant safety. Additional exclusion criteria 
include pregnancy, obstructive lung disease, claustro-
phobia, a history of spontaneous pneumothorax or the 
presence of any medical device or condition that may 
interfere with IHHT.
A control group of at least 20 healthy individuals, 
matched for age, sex, body mass index (BMI) and activity 
level, will be included for baseline comparisons. Controls 
must be in good general health, without chronic pain, 
neurological or psychiatric disorders and will complete 
the same baseline assessments as patients.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for both patients and 
controls are detailed in table 1 and table 2. At the start of 
each of the six treatment visits, subjects will be excluded 
from the period if any of the criteria listed in table  3 
apply. All patients will undergo a comprehensive assess-
ment, including questionnaires, physical examinations 
and laboratory testing at baseline and post-­treatment.
Treatment/intervention
Participants in the IHHT group will receive therapy using 
the HypoxBreath device (Telmed Telemedizin GmbH, 
Germany; CE-­marked medical device, class IIa). The 
HypoxBreath system integrates a built-­in compressor, 
an air reservoir and a membrane module that dynami-
cally adjusts the fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO₂) by 
adding or removing oxygen from ambient air. Treatment 
parameters are controlled via a user interface connected 
to a monitoring system and data-­logging server.
Each treatment session consists of four to seven alter-
nating hypoxia–hyperoxia cycles, lasting a total of 
22–40 min. During therapy, arterial oxygen saturation 
(SpO₂) fluctuates cyclically due to variable FiO₂ levels, 
ranging from 9% to 13% during the hypoxic phase to 
36% during the hyperoxic restitution phase. Heart rate, 
SpO₂, respiratory rate, heart rate variability and FiO₂ are 
continuously monitored throughout each session.
Treatment settings are individually calibrated based 
on physiological parameters and participant tolerance. 
Adjustments may be made during the session to account 
for relaxation level, anxiety or physiological fatigue. The 
clinical protocol applied at SANA Medical Systems is 
based on data from more than 3000 patients treated with 
IHHT.
The selected treatment frequency and interval were 
based on clinical experience, feasibility considerations 
and safety considerations specific to individuals with ME/
CFS, particularly the risk of symptom exacerbation and 
PEM. Unlike more intensive IHHT regimens adminis-
tered several times weekly in rehabilitation settings, the 
present protocol applies a lower-­frequency, individualised 
dosing strategy intended to allow sufficient physiological 
recovery and adaptive responses between sessions. This 
approach is based on the principle of hormesis, whereby 
controlled intermittent hypoxia exposure may stimulate 
adaptive mitochondrial, autonomic, vascular and cellular 
stress-­response pathways while minimising excessive 
physiological burden. Previous observational data from 
patients with post-­COVID-­19 condition demonstrated 
clinically meaningful improvements in fatigue, pain and 
quality of life following a median of six individualised 
IHHT sessions.40
Participants in the placebo (sham) group will undergo 
simulated IHHT sessions using room air (21% FiO₂). To 
mimic the auditory and mechanical sensations of IHHT, 
the HypoxBreath device will reproduce airflow fluctua-
tions corresponding to the treatment intervals. The sham 
intervention is designed to mimic the procedural aspects 
of IHHT, including airflow delivery, mask application and 
device-­related acoustic cues, while delivering normoxic 
air. However, as the sham condition does not reproduce 
the physiological effects associated with hypoxia and 
hyperoxia exposure, some participants may perceive 
differences between treatment conditions.
Each participant will complete six treatment sessions 
over 8 weeks, with sessions spaced 6–8 days apart to allow 
physiological recovery and adaptation between expo-
sures. Patient-­centred and self-­reported outcomes will be 
recorded at each visit prior to treatment.
Procedures
All potential participants will receive oral and written 
information about the study and provide written informed 
consent prior to any study-­related procedures. An 
example of the participant consent form is provided in the 

5
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Table 1  Inclusion criteria at screening visit
Patients
Controls
Justification/rationale
Justification/rationale
Diagnosis
Established diagnosis of ME/CFS using 
the International Consensus Criteria42 
with disease duration of more than 
6 months and exercise intolerance/PEM
Subjects must be in good health as 
determined by the medical history, physical 
examinations and laboratory assessments, 
and must not show any clinically significant 
deviations from reference ranges on 12-­
lead ECG, vital signs (blood pressure, pulse 
rate and respiratory rate) or laboratory 
parameters (renal function and electrolyte 
balance, haematological parameters, 
immune-­inflammatory markers and thyroid 
function tests)
To enrol a well-­defined and 
homogeneous group of patients 
diagnosed with ME/CFS
Interpretability of results
Disease severity
Classification as having a mild/moderate 
disease severity according to the NICE 
guidelines43
N/A
To enrol capable patients to meet up at 
the clinic for inclusion and IHHT sessions
BMI
Body mass index >18 kg/m2 and <30 kg/
m2
Body mass index >18 kg/m2 and <30 kg/m2
Exclude obesity and being underweight 
due to its impact on mitochondrial 
function
Consistent with being in good health
To ensure alignment with the patient group
Gender and age
Female, 20–59 years
Female, 20–59 years
To minimise variability
To minimise variability
Contraception use
Use of highly effective contraception with 
a low failure rate defined as <1% per year 
for at least 1 month prior to screening 
and agreement to use such a method 
during study participation and for an 
additional 1 week after the end of IHHT:
	
►Combined (oestrogen and 
progestogen containing) hormonal 
contraception
	
►Progestogen-­only hormonal 
contraception associated with 
inhibition of ovulation
	
►An intra-­uterine device (hormone-­free)
	
►An intra-­uterine hormone releasing 
system (IUS)
A woman of non-­childbearing potential 
may be included if surgically sterile 
(ie, after hysterectomy or bilateral 
oophorectomy) or post-­menopausal for 
at least 2 years.
Use of highly effective contraception with 
a low failure rate defined as<1% per year 
for at least 1 month prior to screening and 
agreement to use such a method during 
study participation:
	
►Combined (oestrogen and progestogen 
containing) hormonal contraception
	
►Progestogen-­only hormonal contraception 
associated with inhibition of ovulation
	
►An intra-­uterine device (hormone-­free)
	
►An IUS
A woman of non-­childbearing potential 
may be included if surgically sterile (ie, after 
hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy) or 
post-­menopausal for at least 2 years.
To avoid pregnancies with potential harm 
to the unborn
To ensure alignment with the patient group
Informed consent
Provision of signed and dated informed 
consent form
Provision of signed and dated informed 
consent form
Ethical requirement
Ethical requirement
Continued

6
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
online supplemental material. A screening visit will then 
be conducted to confirm eligibility based on predefined 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Demographic informa-
tion, medical history and current medications will be 
recorded, and a safety screening for contraindications to 
IHHT will be completed.
Eligible participants will then attend a baseline assess-
ment that includes a comprehensive battery of self-­
reported questionnaires evaluating fatigue, PEM, pain, 
autonomic symptoms and quality of life, together with 
physiological and laboratory assessments. Participants 
fulfilling all inclusion criteria will be randomised 1:1 to 
receive either IHHT using the HypoxBreath device or a 
sham (placebo) protocol.
Each participant will complete six treatment sessions 
over an 8-­week period, scheduled at approximately 
6–8-­day intervals. A post-­treatment assessment will be 
conducted no earlier than 2 weeks after the final session, 
repeating the full baseline evaluation to assess short-­term 
effects. Participants will additionally complete online 
follow-­up questionnaires at 3, 6 and 12 months post-­
intervention to assess the persistence of treatment effects.
All trial procedures will be conducted in accordance with 
the study’s SOPs and International Council for Harmoni-
sation – Good Clinical Practice (ICH-­GCP) guidelines. A 
summary of study procedures and assessment time points 
is provided in online supplemental table 1.
Assessments/measurements
A comprehensive battery of clinical, physiological, neuro-
cognitive and biochemical assessments will be under-
taken to evaluate the efficacy of IHHT and to elucidate 
its impact on autonomic regulation, mitochondrial func-
tion and systemic pathophysiology in ME/CFS. All assess-
ments will be standardised and performed in accordance 
with the study SOPs and ICH-­GCP guidelines. Data will be 
collected at baseline (Visit 1) and post-­treatment (Visit 8), 
unless otherwise specified. In addition, online follow-­up 
assessments will be conducted at 3, 6 and 12 months post-­
intervention to evaluate the durability of treatment effects 
on quality of life, fatigue, pain and autonomic symptoms.
At each on-­site assessment, participants will undergo 
a structured sequence of evaluations including patient-­
reported outcome measures (PROMs), physical and 
cognitive performance tests, autonomic and sensory 
profiling, tissue oxygenation assessments and biological 
sampling for mechanistic biomarkers.
PROMs
SF-36
The SF-­36 is a 36-­item self-­administered questionnaire 
designed to assess health-­related quality of life across eight 
domains during the preceding 4 weeks: physical func-
tioning (10 items), role limitations due to physical health 
(four items), role limitations due to emotional problems 
(three items), energy/fatigue (four items), emotional 
well-­being (five items), social functioning (two items), 
pain (two items) and general health (five items).44 45 One 
additional item evaluates perceived change in overall 
health compared with 1 year earlier. Each item is coded 
and transformed to a 0–100 scale according to the SF-­36 
scoring manual, and the eight domain scores are derived 
as the average of their transformed item scores, with 
higher scores indicating better perceived health status. 
The vitality domain, reflecting energy and fatigue, will 
serve as the primary endpoint in this study, as it directly 
captures the core symptomatology of ME/CFS. The vali-
dated Danish version of the SF-­36, for which reliability, 
scaling assumptions and population norms have been 
established, will be applied.46
FSS
The Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) is a validated self-­
administered questionnaire designed to assess the severity 
and functional impact of fatigue. The FSS consists of nine 
items evaluating how fatigue interferes with motivation, 
physical functioning, work, family and social life. Each 
item is scored on a 7-­point Likert scale, with higher scores 
indicating greater fatigue severity.47 48
The FSS has demonstrated good validity, internal consis-
tency and test–retest reliability across multiple chronic 
and neurological conditions, including autoimmune and 
Patients
Controls
Justification/rationale
Justification/rationale
Compliance with study procedures
Stated willingness to comply with all 
study procedures and regimens and 
availability for the duration of the study
Stated willingness to comply with all study 
procedures and regimens and availability for 
the duration of the study
Ethical requirement and to minimise 
dropout rate
Ethical requirement and to minimise dropout 
rate
Physical activity
N/A
Not performing regular strenuous physical 
activity every week
To match for sedentary lifestyle of the 
patients
IHHT, intermittent hypoxia-­hyperoxia treatment; ME/CFS, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome; NICE, National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence; PEM, post-­exertional malaise.
Table 1  Continued

7
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Table 2  Exclusion criteria at screening visit
Patients
Controls
Justification/rationale
Justification/rationale
1
Participation in other clinical trials.
Participation in other clinical trials.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
2
Inability to follow the treatment plan, incl. known 
medical conditions that might place the patient at 
risk from the IHHT, or confound the interpretation 
of the test results, including inability to avoid or 
limit medication as required by the study protocol.
Inability to follow the study procedures, incl. 
known medical conditions that might confound the 
interpretation of the test results, including inability 
to avoid or limit medication as required by the study 
protocol.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Subject safety
Consistent with being in good health
3
Presence of any medical devices (eg, cardiac 
pacemaker), implants or prosthesis unless it is 
beyond discussion that these will not put the 
subject’s safety during the study at risk and will 
not interfere with the results of the study.
Presence of any medical devices (eg, cardiac 
pacemaker), implants or prosthesis unless it is beyond 
discussion that these will not put the subject’s safety 
during the study at risk and will not interfere with the 
results of the study.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
4
Any relevant symptom of neurological dysfunction 
of the motor and sensory system that is not part 
of the ME/CFS disease or may interfere with the 
conduct of the study.
Any relevant symptom of neurological dysfunction of 
the motor and sensory system that may interfere with 
the conduct of the study.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
5
History or clinically significant symptoms of 
psychiatric disease that are not considered part 
of the ME/CFS disease and that may impact the 
conduct or interpretation of study assessments 
(eg, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, 
psychotic disorders).
History or clinically significant symptoms of psychiatric 
disease that may impact the conduct or interpretation 
of study assessments (eg, major depressive disorder, 
bipolar disorder, psychotic disorders).
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
6
History or symptoms of central nervous system 
disease or peripheral nerve lesions or dysfunction 
that are not part of the ME disease or that may 
impact the study assessments.
History or symptoms of central nervous system 
disease or peripheral nerve lesions or dysfunction with 
sequelae that may impact the study assessments.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
7
N/A
Not willing or able to abstain from changes in physical 
exercise activities during the study.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
8
Any chronic pain condition not considered part 
of the ME/CFS condition or recent (ie, within 
the preceding 2 years) history thereof, that may 
impact study assessments.
Any chronic pain condition or recent (ie, within the 
preceding 2 years) history thereof.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
9
Migraine disorder not considered part of the ME/
CFS condition (at least one attack in the last 
24 months) that may impact study assessments.
Migraine (at least one attack in the last 24 months).
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
Continued

8
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Patients
Controls
Justification/rationale
Justification/rationale
10
Recurrent headache or back pain not attributable 
to ME/CFS occurring on more than 5 days per 
month in the last 3 months.
Recurrent headache or back pain on more than 5 days/
month in the last 3 months.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
11
Active internal disease or clinically significant 
sequelae of internal disease (eg, diabetes mellitus, 
liver diseases, kidney diseases, cardiovascular 
diseases, hypo- or hyperthyroidism, hypertension, 
etc) not related to ME/CFS that may impact the 
conduct or interpretation of study assessments.
Active internal disease or sequelae of internal disease 
(eg, diabetes mellitus, liver diseases, kidney diseases, 
cardiovascular diseases, hypo- or hyperthyroidism, 
hypertension, etc).
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
Consistent with being in good health
12
Clinically significant disease (eg, medical history 
of infection with HIV Type 1 or Type 2, hepatitis 
B or hepatitis C) or condition that may affect 
efficacy or safety assessments, or any other 
reasons, which, in the investigator’s opinion, may 
preclude the subject’s participation in the trial.
Clinically significant disease (eg, medical history of 
infection with HIV Type 1 or Type 2, hepatitis B or 
hepatitis C) or condition that may affect efficacy or 
safety assessments, or any other reasons, which, in 
the investigator’s opinion, may preclude the subject’s 
participation in the trial.
Safety of investigator and their staff
Standardisation of the trial population
Safety of investigator and their staff
Standardisation of the trial population
13
Not willing or able to abstain from alcohol from 24 
hours prior to any study visit and until the end of 
the study.
Not willing or able to abstain from alcohol from 24 
hours prior to the study.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
14
Consumption of cannabis in the last 4 weeks prior 
to the study.
Consumption of cannabis in the last 4 weeks prior to 
the study.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
15
Habitually smoking more than 10 cigarettes, 2 
cigars or 2 pipes of tobacco per day within the 
last 6 months before enrolment in this trial.
Habitually smoking more than 10 cigarettes, 2 cigars 
or 2 pipes of tobacco per day within the last 6 months 
before enrolment in this trial.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
16
Known or suspected of not being willing or able to 
comply with the requirements of the trial protocol 
or the instructions.
Known or suspected of not being willing or able to 
comply with the requirements of the trial protocol or the 
instructions.
To ascertain the subject′s suitability for the study
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study
17
Inability to communicate meaningfully with the 
trial site staff (eg, insufficient language skills).
Inability to communicate meaningfully with the trial site 
staff (eg, insufficient language skills).
To ascertain the subject′s safety
To ascertain the subject′s safety
18
Any person with direct involvement in the trial 
conduct; any person under the direct supervision 
of the investigator or dependent on the 
investigator.
Any person with direct involvement in the trial conduct; 
any person under the direct supervision of the 
investigator or dependent on the investigator.
Ethical requirement
Ethical requirement
19
Blood loss of 500 mL or more (eg, owing to blood 
donation) within 3 months before enrolment in this 
trial.
Blood loss of 500 mL or more (eg, owing to blood 
donation) within 3 months before enrolment in this trial.
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study
Table 2  Continued
Continued

9
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Patients
Controls
Justification/rationale
Justification/rationale
20
Pregnancy, planned pregnancy or lactation.
Pregnancy, planned pregnancy or lactation.
Ethical requirement to protect the unborn or 
newborn child
To ensure alignment with the patient group
21
Participation in a structured graded exercise 
therapy (GET) programme
Participation in a structured exercise programme
To avoid confounding effects on post-­exertional 
malaise and other ME/CFS symptoms.
To ensure consistency across study arms and avoid 
potential confounding factors.
A set of temporary exclusion criteria have also been defined. The subject is not excluded if some of these temporary exclusion 
criteria are met. Instead, the first study visit may be postponed. Before the start of the first study visit, previously met 
temporary exclusion criteria will be checked again, and their absence will be verified before the screening for study visit one 
takes place.
In addition, to minimise acute physiological confounding, participants will be instructed to refrain from consumption or use of 
caffeine, alcohol and tobacco, and from intake of increased amounts of salt or fluids, for at least 24 hours prior to baseline and 
post-­treatment assessment visits, as well as before each treatment session. Compliance with these pre-­visit restrictions will be 
verified at each visit, and visits may be postponed if the restrictions are not met.
22
N/A
Any transient illness within 2 weeks before screening.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
23
Significant changes in physical exercise activities, 
for example, starting strenuous workout/training 
within 1 week before screening.
Significant changes in physical exercise activities, for 
example, starting strenuous workout/training within 
1 week before screening.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the 
study
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
24
N/A
Current or recent (during the preceding 2 weeks) acute 
pain lasting more than 4 hours.
To avoid interference with the purpose of the study
IHHT, intermittent hypoxia-­hyperoxia treatment; ME/CFS, myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
Table 2  Continued
Table 3  Exclusion criteria at treatment visits
Patients
Controls
Justification/rationale
Justification/rationale
25
For female subjects of childbearing potential: positive or missing 
pregnancy test
For female subjects of childbearing potential: 
positive or missing pregnancy test
To protect the fetus
To ensure alignment with the patient group
26
Blood loss of 500 mL or more (eg, owing to blood donation) since 
screening.
Blood loss of 500 mL or more (eg, owing to blood 
donation) since screening.
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study
Temporary exclusion criteria at treatment visits. The subject is not excluded if some of these temporary exclusion criteria 
are met at screening of the treatment visit. Instead, the treatment visit may be postponed. If this is the case, all temporary 
exclusion criteria will be checked again.
27
Alcohol consumption in the last 24 hours prior to the study visit.
Alcohol consumption in the last 24 hours prior to the 
study visit.
Subject safety
Subject safety
28
Incidentally not willing or able to comply with the requirements of 
the trial protocol or the instructions or to communicate meaningfully 
with the trial site staff.
Incidentally not willing or able to comply with the 
requirements of the trial protocol or the instructions 
or to communicate meaningfully with the trial site 
staff.
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study
To ascertain the subject’s suitability for the study

10
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
fatigue-­related disorders.47 48 A validated Danish version 
of the FSS is available and has shown high reliability and 
construct validity in Danish patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus.48
Given the central role of fatigue in ME/CFS, the FSS 
provides a clinically relevant and widely used measure 
of fatigue severity and its impact on daily functioning; 
however, it is limited by ceiling effects, as patients typically 
exhibit uniformly high scores.
COMPASS-31
The COMPASS-­31 is a validated self-­administered ques-
tionnaire developed to quantify autonomic symptom 
burden across six domains: orthostatic intolerance (four 
items), vasomotor (three items), secretomotor (four 
items), gastrointestinal (12 items), bladder (three items) 
and pupillomotor (two items).49 Each item is scored and 
weighted according to domain-­specific algorithms, gener-
ating a total score ranging from 0 to 100, with higher 
scores indicating more severe autonomic dysfunction.
The questionnaire captures a wide spectrum of auto-
nomic symptoms, including dizziness or presyncope, 
altered sweating, gastrointestinal dysmotility, urinary 
disturbances and pupillary or thermoregulatory abnor-
malities. The COMPASS-­31 demonstrates excellent 
internal consistency (Cronbach’s α >0.9), strong test–
retest reliability and sensitivity to clinical change in condi-
tions characterised by autonomic dysregulation such as 
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), 
diabetic autonomic neuropathy and ME/CFS.49–51 
This study will use the validated Danish translation of 
COMPASS-­31 developed and linguistically validated by 
Brinth et al,52 ensuring semantic and conceptual equiva-
lence with the original instrument.
FUNCAP-27 and PEM
The Functional Capacity questionnaire, 27-­item version 
(FUNCAP-­27), is a patient-­informed, self-­administered 
questionnaire developed to assess functional capacity 
and PEM in individuals with ME/CFS.53 The instrument 
is designed to capture activity-­related limitations and the 
consequences of exertion across daily physical, cognitive 
and sensory activities. Unlike traditional activity ques-
tionnaires that focus on activity frequency or duration, 
FUNCAP-­27 evaluates the severity and duration of post-­
exertional consequences and the extent to which under-
taking a specific activity limits the ability to perform other 
activities, thereby directly addressing PEM.
FUNCAP-­27 comprises 27 items distributed across eight 
functional domains: personal hygiene/basic functions, 
walking and movement, being upright, activities in the 
home, communication, activities outside the home, reac-
tions to light and sound and concentration. Each item is 
scored on a 0–6 ordinal scale reflecting the impact of the 
activity on subsequent functional capacity, with higher 
scores indicating greater functional capacity. Participants 
are instructed to respond with reference to an average 
day during the preceding month, in accordance with the 
original instrument instructions.
The questionnaire was developed through multiple 
rounds of structured patient feedback and large-­scale 
national and international surveys and has demonstrated 
strong internal consistency (Cronbach’s α for total score 
approximately 0.95), high test–retest reliability and clear 
discrimination across ME/CFS severity categories.53 
FUNCAP-­27 has been proposed as particularly suitable 
for interventional research and has also been suggested 
for use in conditions characterised by fatigue and PEM, 
including long COVID. In the present study, FUNCAP-­27 
will be used to assess changes in functional capacity and 
PEM in response to IHHT.
Pain assessment (painDETECT)
Pain characteristics will be assessed using the painDE-
TECT questionnaire, a validated, self-­administered instru-
ment designed to capture pain qualities, sensory symptom 
patterns and pain distribution in individuals with chronic 
pain.54 The questionnaire includes items assessing pain 
intensity, pain course pattern, pain radiation and sensory 
descriptors such as burning sensations, tingling or prick-
ling, electric shock-­like pain, thermal sensitivity, numb-
ness, pressure-­evoked pain and allodynia. Responses are 
combined into a composite score reflecting the overall 
burden and profile of pain-­related sensory symptoms.
In the present study, painDETECT will be used descrip-
tively to characterise pain phenotypes and to explore 
changes in pain-­related sensory symptoms following 
IHHT. A Danish-­language version previously applied in 
Danish clinical pain cohorts was used.55
Cognitive performance: d2-R test of attention
Cognitive performance will be assessed using the d2-­R 
Test of Attention – Revised, a validated and widely used 
measure of selective and sustained attention, processing 
speed and concentration capacity. The d2-­R is a visual 
cancellation task requiring rapid discrimination of target 
stimuli while inhibiting responses to visually similar 
distractors, thereby providing an objective assessment of 
attentional control and mental processing efficiency.56 
Deficits in attention, processing speed and concen-
tration are commonly reported in ME/CFS and are 
considered key contributors to cognitive fatigue and the 
symptom complex often referred to as “brain fog’.57–59 
The test consists of 14 timed segments, each lasting 
20 s, during which participants scan rows of symbols and 
mark predefined target items as quickly and accurately 
as possible. Primary outcome measures include concen-
tration performance (correct responses minus commis-
sion errors), total processed targets, omission errors and 
commission errors. Test results are interpreted using 
age- and sex-­adjusted normative data derived from large 
population samples. The d2-­R has demonstrated good 
reliability, construct validity and sensitivity to attentional 
impairments across clinical and non-­clinical popula-
tions.56 60

11
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Physical performance – hand-grip strength and muscle 
fatigability
Muscle strength and fatigability: handgrip strength test
Handgrip strength will be assessed as an objective, low-­
burden measure of muscle strength, fatigability and post-­
exertional impairment in ME/CFS. Reduced handgrip 
strength and increased performance fatigability have 
consistently been reported in ME/CFS and have been 
shown to discriminate patients from healthy controls and 
to correlate with disease severity, physical functioning and 
PEM.11 61 62
Participants will perform repeated maximal voluntary 
contractions using a calibrated hand dynamometer while 
seated in an upright position with the forearm supported. 
After familiarisation, participants will complete a series of 
repeated maximal grips with standardised rest intervals, 
allowing assessment of peak force, mean force across repe-
titions and decline in force over time. Repeated-­measures 
handgrip protocols have been shown to capture exertion-­
related performance decline and impaired recovery in 
ME/CFS, even in the absence of maximal whole-­body 
exercise.63
Handgrip-­derived fatigability indices have been associ-
ated with PEM severity, muscle pain, autonomic dysfunc-
tion and biochemical markers of exertional stress in ME/
CFS, supporting their relevance as both functional and 
mechanistic outcome measures.61 63 64
Tissue oxygenation and microvascular function
NIRS during handgrip exercise
NIRS will be used to assess skeletal muscle oxygenation, 
haemodynamic responses, both at rest, during hand-
grip exercise and after handgrip exercise during occlu-
sion to measure microvascular responsiveness. NIRS is a 
non-­invasive optical technique that enables continuous, 
real-­time assessment of relative changes in oxygenated 
haemoglobin, deoxygenated haemoglobin and total 
haemoglobin, providing indices of local oxygen delivery, 
extraction and microvascular perfusion.65 66
In ME/CFS, impaired oxygen delivery, altered microvas-
cular regulation and abnormal muscle oxygen utilisation 
during physical activity have been proposed to contribute 
to early fatigability and post-­exertional symptom exac-
erbation. Studies combining submaximal exercise with 
NIRS have demonstrated reduced oxygen extraction, 
blunted haemodynamic responses and delayed recovery 
kinetics in ME/CFS compared with healthy controls.67 
There is increasing evidence for disturbed vascular 
responsiveness and peripheral endothelial dysfunction 
in ME/CFS, which relates to disease severity.24 68 69 In a 
case-­control study, Miller et al showed that NIRS measure-
ments obtained during repetitive submaximal handgrip 
exercise revealed abnormal patterns of muscle oxygen-
ation and impaired recovery in ME/CFS.67
In the present study, NIRS will be recorded continu-
ously during handgrip strength testing, at baseline and 
post-­treatment and during occlusion to measure micro-
vascular responsiveness. This integrated approach allows 
simultaneous assessment of mechanical performance 
and muscle oxygenation dynamics, enabling evaluation 
of exertion-­related changes in oxygen utilisation and 
recovery. NIRS-­derived outcomes will be explored as 
physiological correlates of fatigability and PEM and as 
mechanistic endpoints responsive to IHHT.
Autonomic function testing
Autonomic cardiovascular regulation will be assessed 
using a combination of active orthostatic challenge (NLT) 
and autonomic reflex testing (Valsalva manoeuvre). 
These complementary tests allow evaluation of heart rate 
and blood pressure regulation during orthostatic stress 
and assessment of sympathetic and parasympathetic baro-
reflex function, both of which are frequently impaired in 
ME/CFS.70 71
NLT
Orthostatic cardiovascular responses will be evaluated 
using the 10 min NLT. The NLT was originally developed 
by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to 
assess cardiovascular responses to orthostatic stress and 
has been adapted for clinical use as a practical alternative 
to head-­up tilt table testing.72 73 The test has demonstrated 
good agreement with tilt testing for identifying ortho-
static haemodynamic abnormalities, including POTS and 
orthostatic hypotension.73 74
Following a 10-­min supine rest period to establish 
baseline values of heart rate and blood pressure, partic-
ipants will assume an upright posture with the heels 
positioned approximately 15–20 cm from a wall and the 
shoulders supported against the wall to minimise skel-
etal muscle pumping. Heart rate and blood pressure 
will be recorded continuously during the subsequent 
10 min of upright posture. The test will be terminated 
prematurely if participants develop significant symp-
toms such as dizziness, palpitations, presyncope or 
cognitive disturbance, consistent with consensus recom-
mendations.75 76
Beat-­to-­beat blood pressure will be measured non-­
invasively using finger photoplethysmography based 
on the volume-­clamp technique, allowing continuous 
assessment of systolic and diastolic blood pressure and 
heart rate.77 Mean heart rate, systolic blood pressure 
and diastolic blood pressure will be derived from the 
final 3 min of the supine phase and the final 3 min of the 
upright phase, as commonly applied in orthostatic testing 
protocols.74 76
The NLT enables classification of orthostatic haemo-
dynamic responses, including normal responses, POTS, 
delayed orthostatic hypotension and other forms of ortho-
static intolerance. Importantly, orthostatic symptoms and 
physiological impairment in ME/CFS may occur even in 
the absence of diagnostic heart rate or blood pressure 
thresholds, reflecting impaired cerebral perfusion and 
autonomic dysregulation during upright posture.29 78 79

12
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Valsalva manoeuvre
Autonomic reflex function will be further assessed using 
the Valsalva manoeuvre, which provides established 
indices of sympathetic vasomotor function, parasympa-
thetic cardiac control and baroreflex sensitivity.75 76 80
Participants will be tested in a seated position with 
continuous recording of heart rate and blood pressure. 
After a maximal inspiration, participants will exhale 
forcefully into a mouthpiece connected to a manometer, 
maintaining an expiratory pressure of 40 mmHg for 15 s, 
followed by normal breathing. The manoeuvre will be 
repeated up to three times, and the technically optimal 
recording will be selected for analysis, in accordance with 
standard autonomic testing recommendations.76 80
The characteristic four phases of the Valsalva manoeuvre 
will be analysed. During phase II, reductions in venous 
return and stroke volume provoke compensatory sympa-
thetic vasoconstriction, reflected in recovery of blood 
pressure (phase IIb). Following release, the transient 
blood pressure overshoot (phase IV) and associated heart 
rate slowing reflect parasympathetic reactivation.76 80
Derived outcome measures will include: (i) the slope 
of systolic blood pressure recovery during phase IIb as an 
index of sympathetic vasomotor function; (ii) baroreflex 
sensitivity, calculated from the relationship between RR 
interval changes and systolic blood pressure following 
release; (iii) the Valsalva ratio (maximum heart rate 
during strain divided by minimum heart rate within 30 s 
after release); and (iv) indices reflecting sympathovagal 
balance. Abnormalities in these measures have been 
reported in ME/CFS and related autonomic disorders, 
consistent with impaired baroreflex control, altered 
sympathetic activation and reduced parasympathetic 
modulation.29 75
Sudomotor function assessment (udoscan)
Sudomotor autonomic function will be assessed using 
Sudoscan (Impeto Medical, Paris, France), a non-­invasive 
device designed to evaluate sweat gland function and 
small-­fibre autonomic nerve integrity through measure-
ment of electrochemical skin conductance (ESC) in the 
hands and feet. Sudomotor dysfunction is considered 
a marker of small-­fibre autonomic neuropathy and has 
been associated with autonomic dysfunction in neurolog-
ical and metabolic disorders.81 82
During the assessment, participants will place their 
palms and soles on stainless steel electrodes, and a low-­
voltage electrochemical stimulus will be applied to 
measure chloride ion conductance generated by sweat 
glands. ESC values will be recorded separately for hands 
and feet, together with asymmetry measures between 
sides. Reduced ESC values may reflect impaired small-­
fibre autonomic function.
The examination is non-­invasive, painless and completed 
within approximately 2 min. Sudoscan measurements will 
be performed at baseline and post-­treatment as explor-
atory markers of peripheral autonomic and small-­fibre 
dysfunction and will be analysed in relation to clinical 
symptoms, autonomic testing and other neurophysiolog-
ical measures.
Thermal QST
Thermal quantitative sensory testing (QST) will be 
performed to assess thermal detection and pain thresh-
olds mediated by small sensory nerve fibres, including 
thinly myelinated Aδ fibres and unmyelinated C fibres. 
QST provides a standardised, non-­invasive psychophys-
ical method for evaluating somatosensory function and 
is widely used to characterise small-­fibre dysfunction in 
neuropathic pain conditions and fibromyalgia.83–85
Thermal QST will be conducted using a computer-­
controlled NeuroSensory Analyzer (TSAII, Medoc 
Ltd., Israel) equipped with a Peltier-­based thermode 
(30×30 mm). Testing will be performed in a quiet, 
temperature-­controlled room (22–24 °C) following a 
standardised acclimatisation period to minimise environ-
mental influences on sensory perception. Participants will 
receive uniform verbal instructions and will be informed 
that they remain in control of the procedure and may 
terminate testing at any time.
Cold detection threshold (CDT) and warm detection 
threshold (WDT) will be assessed starting from a baseline 
temperature of 32 °C. For CDT, temperature will decrease 
at a rate of 1 °C/s, and participants will indicate the first 
perception of cold. For WDT, temperature will increase at 
1 °C/s, and participants will indicate the first perception 
of warmth. Each modality will be repeated three times, 
and mean threshold values will be calculated. CDT and 
WDT primarily reflect the function of Aδ and C fibres, 
respectively, and provide sensitive indices of small-­fibre 
sensory integrity.84 85
Cold pain threshold and heat pain threshold will be 
assessed using similar ramped stimuli, with temperature 
decreasing or increasing from baseline until the partic-
ipant reports the first sensation perceived as painful. 
Participants will be instructed to respond at the transition 
from non-­painful to painful sensation and not to tolerate 
intolerable pain. Safety cut-­off limits will be applied in 
accordance with established guidelines to prevent tissue 
injury. Each pain threshold will be assessed three times, 
and mean values will be used for analysis. Thermal pain 
thresholds predominantly reflect C-­fibre-­mediated noci-
ceptive processing.83 85 86
Thermal QST will be performed at predefined anatom-
ical sites selected according to the study protocol. Skin will 
be inspected prior to testing to exclude areas with lesions, 
inflammation or altered integrity. Between stimuli, suffi-
cient time will be allowed for skin temperature to return 
to baseline. Raw threshold values and averaged measures 
will be recorded, and tests with inconsistent responses 
or delayed reactions will be flagged as unreliable. Where 
appropriate, results will be interpreted in relation to 
established normative reference data.84 87
Thermal QST has demonstrated good test–retest reli-
ability, sensitivity to small-­fibre pathology and clinical rele-
vance across a range of chronic pain and fatigue-­related 

13
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
disorders. Altered thermal detection and pain thresholds 
may reflect changes in sensory processing.85 88 89
Skin biopsy and histological analyses
Skin punch biopsies will be obtained to assess cutaneous 
small-­fibre nerve integrity, neuroimmune features, mito-
chondrial markers and microvascular structures. Skin 
biopsy is a minimally invasive and well-­validated technique 
for investigating peripheral mechanisms contributing to 
pain, sensory dysfunction and autonomic symptoms and 
is widely used in the evaluation of small-­fibre neuropathy 
and chronic pain disorders.89–92
A 3-­mm punch skin biopsy will be obtained from the 
lower leg of each participant, 10 cm proximal to the lateral 
malleolus, under aseptic conditions and local anaesthesia 
using 1% lidocaine. Biopsies will be performed by trained 
personnel according to established safety standards. 
Following the biopsy sampling, the biopsy site will be 
gently compressed to achieve haemostasis and covered 
with a sterile adhesive dressing.90 91
Biopsy specimens will be processed according to stan-
dard protocols for immunohistochemical analysis. Tissue 
will be fixed, cryoprotected and sectioned for staining 
with antibodies against the pan-­axonal marker protein 
gene product 9.5 (PGP9.5). Intraepidermal nerve fibre 
density (IENFD) will be quantified using established 
stereological and spatial sampling methods, expressed as 
the number or length of nerve fibres crossing the dermal-­
epidermal junction per unit length of epidermis, in accor-
dance with published guidelines and validated analytical 
approaches.90 93 94
To characterise autonomic nerve fibres within the 
skin, immunohistochemical staining of selected dermal 
structures will include markers of cholinergic and adren-
ergic innervation. Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) will 
be used as a marker of predominantly parasympathetic 
cholinergic fibres, particularly within autonomic target 
structures such as sweat glands and pilomotor units, where 
VIP-­positive fibres reliably reflect autonomic innervation 
rather than sensory fibres.91 95 96 Dopamine β-hydroxylase 
(DbH) will be used to identify sympathetic adrenergic 
fibres, as it is selectively expressed in norepinephrine-­
producing neurons and is a well-­established marker of 
sympathetic autonomic innervation in human skin.97 
These markers will be interpreted in the context of their 
known expression patterns and anatomical localisation 
and, where appropriate, analysed alongside the pan-­
neuronal marker PGP9.5 and structural markers to distin-
guish autonomic from sensory nerve fibres, in accordance 
with established skin biopsy guidelines.90 98
To characterise non-­neuronal features, additional 
immunohistochemical staining will be performed to 
identify immune cells (including macrophages), mito-
chondrial markers and vascular structures within the 
dermis. Quantitative and semi-­quantitative analyses will 
be conducted in a blinded manner using standardised 
image analysis procedures.
IENFD is a sensitive structural measure of small-­fibre 
pathology and is widely used in the evaluation of neurop-
athies. Reductions in IENFD have been reported across 
a range of neuropathic and inflammatory conditions 
and provide an objective measure of damage to sensory 
nerve fibres.90 94 99 In ME/CFS and fibromyalgia, previous 
studies have reported reduced IENFD, altered nerve 
morphology and evidence of peripheral nerve involve-
ment, supporting a contribution of cutaneous small-­fibre 
pathology to disease mechanisms and symptom expres-
sion. 81 89 92 100Notably, abnormalities detected in upper 
extremities using Sudoscan suggest that small-­fibre 
pathology in ME/CFS may be non-­length-­dependent in 
a subset of patients.81 Consistent with this heterogeneity, 
reduced IENFD compatible with small-­fibre neuropathy 
has been reported in approximately one-­third of patients 
with ME/CFS.27
Beyond nerve fibre density, skin biopsy allows investiga-
tion of peripheral neuroimmune interactions, which are 
increasingly recognised as contributors to chronic pain 
and sensory hypersensitivity. Immune cell-­nerve interac-
tions within the skin may modulate nociceptor and auto-
nomic fibre excitability and contribute to persistent pain, 
fatigue and post-­exertional symptom exacerbation.101 102 
These mechanisms are of particular relevance in ME/
CFS, where immune dysregulation, fatigue, pain and 
exertional intolerance frequently coexist.
Skin biopsies will be obtained at baseline and post-­
treatment to explore whether IHHT is associated with 
changes in cutaneous nerve integrity, immune and mito-
chondrial features or vascular markers, and to relate these 
findings to clinical outcomes, physiological measures and 
patient-­reported symptoms.
CCM
CCM will be performed to assess small-­fibre nerve 
morphology in vivo by imaging the corneal subbasal nerve 
plexus. CCM is a non-­invasive technique that provides 
quantitative measures of corneal nerve structure and is 
a validated surrogate marker of peripheral small-­fibre 
pathology.103–105 CCM will be performed using a Heidel-
berg Retina Tomograph III with the Rostock Cornea 
Module (Heidelberg Engineering, Germany). Following 
instillation of topical local anaesthetic eye drops, high-­
resolution images of the central corneal sub-­basal nerve 
plexus will be acquired from each eye. The examination 
is brief and well tolerated.
Images will be analysed in a masked manner using 
validated image-­analysis software. Quantitative outcome 
measures will include corneal nerve fibre density, corneal 
nerve fibre length and corneal nerve branch density. These 
parameters have demonstrated good reproducibility and 
sensitivity for detecting small-­fibre nerve damage and 
regeneration and have been shown to correlate with 
IENFD density assessed by skin biopsy.104–107
CCM will be performedat baseline and post-­treatment 
as an exploratory outcome to assess potential changes 
in small-­fibre nerve morphology and to complement 

14
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
thermal QST and skin biopsy findings. Small-­fibre abnor-
malities may contribute to autonomic dysfunction, tissue 
microcirculation/oxygenation and overall symptom 
amplification.
Biobank and molecular measures
IHHT is known to activate hypoxia- and redox-­sensitive 
molecular pathways and to induce systemic immune-­
metabolic adaptations that can be captured in peripheral 
blood and immune cell populations.33–35 To investigate 
molecular signatures associated with ME/CFS and poten-
tial treatment-­related biological changes following IHHT, 
a structured biobanking strategy will be implemented, 
enabling both targeted and exploratory mechanistic 
analyses.
Venous blood samples will be collected at baseline and 
at the post-­treatment follow-­up assessment. Plasma and 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) will be 
isolated and stored under standardised conditions for 
subsequent molecular analyses. Targeted analyses will 
include markers of oxidative stress, such as lipid peroxi-
dation products and isoprostanes, and inflammatory and 
vascular mediators including cytokines and chemokines, 
quantified using ELISA-­based methods. In addition, unbi-
ased profiling approaches will be applied to assess global 
changes in circulating molecular signatures related to 
cellular stress responses, metabolic energy homeostasis 
and immune signalling, using metabolomic, proteomic 
and transcriptomic analyses. These approaches are well 
established for capturing hypoxia- and inflammation-­
related systemic adaptations in ME/CFS and post-­viral 
fatigue syndromes.12 21 22 35
Functional bioenergetic profiling of PBMCs will be 
performed using extracellular flux analysis to quantify 
ATP production derived from mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation and glycolysis. Complementary gene 
and protein expression analyses will focus on redox- and 
oxygen-­sensing pathways, including transcriptional regu-
lators, mitochondrial energy metabolism markers, and 
cellular stress and repair proteins. Immune-­metabolic 
dysregulation at the PBMC level has been repeatedly 
demonstrated in ME/CFS and is considered a key 
mechanistic contributor to PEM and systemic symptom 
burden.11 25 33
Randomisation and blinding
Participants will be randomised in a 1:1 ratio to the inter-
vention or placebo group using a computer-­generated 
randomisation 
sequence 
implemented 
within 
the 
REDCap randomisation module. Randomisation will 
occur after completion of the baseline assessment visit 
and confirmation of eligibility, ensuring that all inclusion 
and exclusion criteria are met prior to allocation.
The allocation sequence will be generated externally 
using a secure randomisation service to create a permuted 
block randomisation scheme, with predefined block sizes 
to ensure balanced group allocation throughout the 
recruitment period. Randomisation will be stratified by 
predefined variables, including age, disease duration and 
disease severity as assessed by the SF-­36 vitality score. The 
resulting allocation table will be uploaded into REDCap 
by a trusted staff member who is not involved in partic-
ipant recruitment, assessment or treatment, thereby 
ensuring allocation concealment.
Within REDCap, the randomisation module will assign 
participants automatically based on the uploaded allo-
cation table and stratification variables. Investigators 
and recruiting staff will have no access to the alloca-
tion sequence and will be unable to predict upcoming 
assignments.
The study will be conducted using a blinded randomis-
ation setup. Treatment allocation will be concealed using 
unique randomisation codes, and the mapping between 
codes and treatment groups will be stored securely by 
designated personnel not otherwise involved in the 
trial. Participants, investigators, outcome assessors and 
data analysts will remain blinded to treatment alloca-
tion throughout the study. To evaluate blinding success, 
participants will be asked to guess their treatment allo-
cation after completion of the intervention. These data 
will be analysed descriptively and incorporated into sensi-
tivity analyses to assess the potential impact of potential 
unblinding on study outcomes. Procedures for emergency 
unblinding will be predefined and implemented only if 
clinically required, in accordance with GCP principles.
This randomisation and blinding procedure follows 
institutional guidelines for REDCap-­based randomisation 
in clinical trials and ensures robust allocation conceal-
ment and protection against selection and performance 
bias.
Safety and AEs
The intervention is considered low risk, and IHHT admin-
istered according to the study protocol has been shown 
to be safe and well tolerated in previous studies.33 40 No 
permanent or severe adverse effects are known to be asso-
ciated with the applied treatment regimen.
Expected transient symptoms associated with IHHT 
include headache on the day of or the day following treat-
ment and short-­lasting fatigue, which may persist for up 
to several days after a session. Mild and transient fatigue 
following treatment may represent an anticipated phys-
iological response to the intervention and will be moni-
tored throughout the study period. However, clinically 
significant symptom exacerbations consistent with PEM, 
including prolonged worsening of symptoms persisting 
beyond 48 hours and substantial functional decline, will 
be prospectively documented and assessed as adverse 
events (AEs). All other AEs will be recorded and evalu-
ated according to predefined criteria.
Risks associated with study-­related procedures are 
minimal. Blood sampling may cause transient discom-
fort, bruising, minor bleeding or swelling at the puncture 
site and rarely local infection. Skin punch biopsy may be 
associated with mild pain, minor bleeding and, in rare 
cases, local infection. These procedures are routinely 

15
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
performed at the study sites, and complications are 
uncommon and typically self-­limiting.
Participant safety will be ensured through contin-
uous monitoring during treatment sessions, including 
assessment of oxygen saturation, heart rate and 
clinical signs of discomfort. Treatment parameters 
will be individually adjusted to ensure tolerability. 
Blood sampling and skin biopsies will be performed 
by trained personnel using sterile techniques, and 
participants will receive appropriate aftercare instruc-
tions. Medical staff will be available throughout the 
study period to address any AEs or concerns. All AEs 
and serious AEs will be documented and reported in 
accordance with GCP guidelines.
Trial monitoring
Trial conduct will be monitored by a project nurse 
independent of the investigators responsible for treat-
ment and data collection, using regular monitoring 
visits and remote monitoring. Monitoring will focus 
on informed consent, protocol adherence and source 
data verification for key variables and AE reporting. 
The monitor will report findings to the sponsor.
No independent data monitoring committee has been 
established due to the low-­risk nature of the intervention 
and continuous monitoring during IHHT sessions.
Data management
All study data will be collected and managed using 
REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at 
Aarhus University. Built-­in range checks, validation 
rules and audit trails will be used to promote data 
quality. Access to identifiable data will be restricted 
to authorised study personnel, and data will be stored 
securely in accordance with the General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) and institutional policies.
To minimise potential bias and ensure scientific 
independence, investigators affiliated with SANA 
Medical Systems ApS and Remedical.Me ApS will not 
have access to unblinded data prior to database lock 
and will not be involved in the final statistical analyses 
or interpretation of efficacy outcomes. Data analysis 
will be conducted by blinded investigators indepen-
dent of the industry collaborators.
Statistical analysis
General principles and analysis populations
All analyses will be prespecified in a statistical analysis 
plan finalised prior to database lock. The primary analysis 
will follow the intention-­to-­treat principle, including all 
randomised participants analysed according to assigned 
treatment group. A per-­protocol sensitivity analysis will 
also be conducted including participants who complete 
the intervention with no major protocol deviations.
Continuous variables will be summarised as mean (SD) 
or median (IQR) as appropriate and categorical vari-
ables as counts and percentages. All statistical tests will 
be two-­sided with a significance level of 0.05. Analyses 
will be performed using R (R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing).
Primary endpoint analysis
The primary endpoint is the change from baseline to post-­
treatment in the SF-­36 vitality domain score. The primary 
comparison between intervention and placebo will be 
performed using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) 
model with post-­treatment SF-­36 vitality as the dependent 
variable, treatment group as the main predictor, and base-
line SF-­36 vitality as a covariate. Stratification variables 
used in randomisation (age, disease duration and disease 
severity) will be included as covariates where appropriate.
Results will be reported as adjusted mean differences 
between groups with 95% CIs and corresponding p values.
No interim analyses or formal stopping guidelines are 
planned. In the event of unexpected safety concerns, the 
sponsor and medically responsible investigator have the 
authority to pause or terminate the trial.
Secondary endpoints
Secondary endpoints (including other SF-­36 domains, 
FSS, FUNCAP-­27, COMPASS-­31 and objective perfor-
mance measures) will be analysed using ANCOVA 
models analogous to the primary analysis (post-­treatment 
outcome adjusted for baseline) or appropriate gener-
alised models for non-­normally distributed data. Where 
outcomes are measured at multiple time points, mixed-­
effects models for repeated measures (MMRM) will be 
used to estimate group differences over time, including 
fixed effects for treatment group, time and group-­by-­time 
interaction, and adjusting for baseline values.
Secondary endpoint analyses will be interpreted with 
attention to multiplicity. The primary endpoint will 
be tested confirmatorily; secondary and exploratory 
outcomes will be interpreted as supportive and hypothesis-­
generating unless otherwise prespecified.
Long-term follow-up PROMs (3, 6 and 12 months)
Online PROMs collected at 3, 6 and 12 months post-­
intervention will be analysed using MMRM to evaluate 
durability of treatment effects over time. Estimated 
marginal means with 95% CIs will be reported for each 
time point.
Exploratory mechanistic endpoints
Exploratory physiological and mechanistic measures (eg, 
tissue oxygenation, autonomic sudomotor indices, CCM, 
skin biopsy measures and molecular biomarkers) will be 
analysed descriptively and using regression or mixed-­
effects models as appropriate. For high-­dimensional 
molecular analyses (eg, RNA sequencing or untargeted 
mass spectrometry), analyses will follow established 
exploratory pipelines. Where appropriate, adjustment for 
multiple testing (eg, false discovery rate control) may be 
applied. Exploratory analyses will examine whether base-
line autonomic, small-­fibre, vascular or immune-­metabolic 
phenotypes are associated with treatment response to 
generate hypotheses about responder profiles.

16
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
Healthy control group
A healthy control group will be included for base-
line comparisons. Controls will not be included in the 
randomised treatment effect analyses. Baseline compar-
isons between patients and controls will be performed 
using appropriate two-­sample tests (t-­test/Wilcoxon for 
continuous variables; χ2/Fisher’s exact for categorical 
variables), and effect sizes with CIs will be reported.
Missing data
Every effort will be made to minimise missing data. 
Primary analyses will use methods appropriate to the 
model (ANCOVA/MMRM) under a missing-­at-­random 
assumption. Sensitivity analyses may include multiple 
imputation depending on the extent and nature of 
missingness.
Sample size
The sample size is based on the primary endpoint, 
defined as the mean change from baseline to post-­
treatment in the SF-­36 vitality score. Based on data from 
a non-­controlled IHHT cohort of long-­COVID patients, a 
mean improvement of 20.5 points with a SD of 22.5 was 
observed.40 Assuming a placebo effect corresponding to 
a 33% improvement (6.8 points), the expected between-­
group difference is 13.7 points.
With a two-­sided alpha level of 0.05 and 80% power, and 
assuming equal SDs in both groups, the sample-­size calcu-
lation using an independent samples t-­test indicates that 
52 participants per group would be required, including 
an anticipated dropout rate of 15%, corresponding to 
a total target sample size of 104 patients. In addition, 20 
healthy controls will be included for baseline reference 
measurements only.
DISCUSSION
This article presents the design and scientific rationale 
for a randomised, placebo-­controlled trial investigating 
IHHT in patients with ME/CFS. The trial is conducted in 
accordance with ICH-­GCP guidelines to safeguard partic-
ipant safety and to ensure the integrity and validity of the 
collected data.
IHHT has been increasingly applied as a non-­
pharmacological intervention aimed at inducing adaptive 
responses in mitochondrial function, vascular regulation, 
immune-­inflammatory signalling and systemic metabolic 
resilience and has demonstrated a favourable safety and 
tolerability profile across a range of clinical and preventive 
settings.33 Nevertheless, the intervention is not without 
transient physiological effects. Given the multisystem 
symptom burden, marked functional impairment, and 
reduced quality of life associated with ME/CFS, the study 
population represents a potentially vulnerable group.43 
Particular emphasis has therefore been placed on thor-
ough informed consent procedures, expectation manage-
ment and careful monitoring throughout the trial to 
minimise undue influence or therapeutic misconception.
A major strength of the present study is its randomised, 
participant- and assessor-­blinded design, which represents 
the methodological gold standard for evaluating patient-­
reported outcomes. This is particularly relevant in ME/
CFS, where subjective symptoms such as fatigue and PEM 
constitute core disease features. The inclusion of a placebo 
intervention and rigorous blinding of participants and 
investigators is intended to reduce bias and enhance the 
interpretability of clinical efficacy outcomes. In addition, 
inclusion of a well-­characterised healthy control group 
allows physiological, autonomic and molecular measures 
to be interpreted relative to normative values, strength-
ening inferences regarding disease-­specific mechanisms.
In addition to the primary and secondary efficacy 
endpoints, the trial incorporates a broad range of explor-
atory and descriptive outcome measures. These include 
assessments of autonomic function, physical and cogni-
tive performance, tissue oxygenation, peripheral nerve 
integrity and immune-­metabolic and oxidative stress 
biomarkers. This comprehensive phenotyping strategy 
may not only generate hypotheses about responder 
profiles but may also provide valuable information on 
disease mechanisms and heterogeneity, independent of 
clinical efficacy outcomes.
Should IHHT demonstrate beneficial effects on quality 
of life, fatigue or functional capacity, the study design 
allows for parallel investigation of potential underlying 
mechanisms, including microvascular function, auto-
nomic regulation, mitochondrial bioenergetics and 
immune-­metabolic signalling. Conversely, even in the 
absence of clear clinical benefit, the collected physiolog-
ical and molecular data are expected to contribute to a 
deeper understanding of ME/CFS pathophysiology and 
to inform future hypothesis-­driven studies.
In summary, this trial is designed to rigorously evaluate 
the safety, feasibility and potential efficacy of IHHT in 
ME/CFS while simultaneously generating mechanistic 
data in a condition for which effective treatments remain 
limited. The results may inform future therapeutic strat-
egies and support the development of more targeted, 
mechanism-­based interventions for ME/CFS and related 
post-­infectious conditions.
LIMITATIONS
The present trial has several important limitations that 
should be considered when interpreting its findings. 
ME/CFS is a heterogeneous and incompletely under-
stood condition with complex, multisystem patho-
physiology. Although growing evidence implicates 
immune-­metabolic, vascular and autonomic dysfunction, 
the relative contribution of these mechanisms may vary 
substantially between individuals. Consequently, treat-
ment effects may differ across patient subgroups, and 
the trial is not powered to perform definitive subgroup 
analyses.
The IHHT protocol applied in this study represents a 
relatively novel intervention in the context of ME/CFS. 

17
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
While intermittent hypoxia-­hyperoxia approaches have 
demonstrated favourable safety and physiological effects 
in other populations, the optimal dose, duration and 
frequency of IHHT for ME/CFS are not yet established. 
The selected treatment regimen is based on existing clin-
ical experience and feasibility considerations rather than 
on prior pilot trials in this specific population, which 
constitutes a limitation. Further studies may be required 
to refine treatment parameters and to assess longer-­term 
or alternative dosing strategies.
Potential selection bias should also be acknowledged. 
Participants are recruited from specialised outpatient 
settings, and inclusion requires a confirmed diagnosis of 
ME/CFS, which may favour individuals with more severe 
or longstanding disease. At the same time, individuals 
with the most severe disease, including those who are 
bedbound or unable to attend in-­person assessments, are 
unlikely to be represented. As a result, the study popula-
tion may not be fully representative of the broader ME/
CFS spectrum, particularly individuals with milder symp-
toms, shorter disease duration or very severe functional 
impairment, potentially limiting generalisability.
The sample size calculation for the primary endpoint is 
extrapolated from observational data in related post-­viral 
fatigue conditions rather than from a dedicated pilot trial 
in ME/CFS. Although the study is adequately powered 
to detect a clinically meaningful difference in the SF-­36 
vitality domain, assumptions regarding effect size and 
variability may be imprecise, introducing a risk of type II 
error. In addition, placebo responses in fatigue-­related 
conditions can be substantial, which may further reduce 
the detectable between-­group difference. Although 
the sham intervention replicates device-­related sensory 
inputs, it does not reproduce the physiological effects 
of hypoxia–hyperoxia exposure, and some participants 
may therefore perceive differences between treatment 
conditions.
Finally, although the trial includes a comprehensive set 
of secondary and exploratory physiological and molec-
ular outcomes, it is not powered to detect small effects 
across these measures. Findings from mechanistic anal-
yses should therefore be interpreted as exploratory and 
hypothesis-­generating rather than confirmatory.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
The trial is conducted in accordance with the Declara-
tion of Helsinki, the ICH-­GCP guidelines and appli-
cable Danish and European regulations. The study was 
approved by the Danish Scientific Ethical Committees (De 
Videnskabsetiske Medicinske Komitéer, VMK; approval 
no. 2500959), covering the clinical trial protocol (version 
3.0, dated 30 June 2025), participant information and 
consent materials, questionnaires and the Investigator’s 
Brochure. Any substantial protocol amendments will be 
communicated to the ethics committee, updated in the 
trial registry and reported in subsequent publications as 
appropriate.
Written informed consent will be obtained from all 
participants prior to any study-­related procedures. Partic-
ipation in optional components, including storage of 
biological material in a research biobank, requires sepa-
rate consent and is not a prerequisite for participation in 
the clinical trial. All data will be handled in compliance 
with the GDPR and Danish data protection legislation, 
and biological samples will be stored and managed in 
accordance with national biobank regulations.
The trial has been registered in a public clinical trials 
registry prior to participant enrolment (​ClinicalTrials.​
gov: NCT07317401). The study will be monitored in 
accordance with institutional procedures to ensure 
compliance with the approved protocol, ICH-­GCP and 
applicable regulatory requirements.
The results of the trial will be disseminated through 
publication in peer-­reviewed scientific journals and 
presentation at national and international conferences, 
irrespective of the direction or magnitude of the findings. 
The primary publication will report the primary and key 
secondary endpoints together with safety outcomes. Addi-
tional publications may report predefined exploratory 
and mechanistic analyses, including physiological, neuro-
biological and molecular outcomes.
A summary of the study results will be made available to 
participants in a format that is accessible and understand-
able to a non-­specialist audience. De-­identified data may 
be shared with other researchers for scientific purposes 
on reasonable request and in accordance with ethical 
approvals, data protection regulations and data-­sharing 
agreements.
Participants are covered by the Danish patient compen-
sation system in the event of harm related to trial partic-
ipation. In addition, participants receiving treatment at 
SANA are covered by SANA Medical Systems’ clinical trial 
insurance.
Author affiliations
1Department of Clinical Medicine, Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
2Department of Clinical Medicine, Danish Pain Research Center, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
3SANA Medical Systems ApS, Aarhus, Central Denmark Region, Denmark
4Remedical.Me ApS, Copenhagen, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
5Department of Mathematics, North Carolina State University at Raleigh, Raleigh, 
North Carolina, USA
6Department of Imaging and Radiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Hilleroed, 
Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
7Department of Neurophysiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Central 
Denmark Region, Denmark
8Section for Surgical Pathophysiology, Juliane Marie Center, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark
Contributors  RKJO was the principal investigator and conceived the study. 
She led the overall study design and provided scientific oversight throughout 
protocol development. MN contributed to the study design and drafted the 
manuscript. SK contributed to drafting the study protocol and the manuscript, 
including the Introduction. MN and SK share first authorship. NM, LRG, LSB, JM 
and HT contributed to patient-­related aspects of the study, including clinical 
evaluation procedures and implementation of study procedures. JM additionally 
contributed to the design and implementation of autonomic testing procedures. 
MO contributed expertise in mathematical modelling and systems physiology 

18
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
and provided scientific input on the design of physiological and autonomic 
assessment components of the study protocol. PK contributed to the design of 
pain-­related outcomes and skin biopsy methodology. CBF and RS contributed to 
the development and implementation of the IHHT intervention protocol. IG, IMDN 
and SC contributed to the development, piloting and refinement of assessment 
protocols and study procedures. All authors contributed to the current submission, 
critically reviewed the manuscript for important intellectual content, approved the 
final version and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. All authors 
meet the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria for 
authorship, and no individuals meeting these criteria have been omitted. RKJO is 
the guarantor of the study and accepts full responsibility for the integrity of the 
work as a whole.
Funding  This project is funded by Independent Research Fund Denmark (grant 
number 3165-­00221B, Rikke KJ Olsen) and supported by the Lundbeck Foundation 
(grant number R359-­2020-­2620, Nanna Brix Finnerup).
Competing interests  LRG discloses employment by and ownership interests in 
Remedical.Me ApS. CBF and RS are founders of and hold ownership interests in 
SANA Medical Systems ApS. MN, SK, NM, IG, IMDN, SC, LSB, MO, PK, HT, JM and 
RKJO declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
manuscript.
Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were involved in the 
design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to the 
Methods section for further details.
Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer-­reviewed.
Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-­commercial. See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iDs
Mastaneh Nochi https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8088-1666
Shreyas Chandra https://orcid.org/0009-0007-9096-7491
Pall Karlsson https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7082-9576
REFERENCES
	
1	 National Institutes of Health. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness The National 
Academies Collection. 2015.
	
2	 Brinth L, Nielsen H, Varming K, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis or 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Ugeskr Laeger 2019;181:181.
	
3	 Valdez AR, Hancock EE, Adebayo S, et al. Estimating Prevalence, 
Demographics, and Costs of ME/CFS Using Large Scale Medical 
Claims Data and Machine Learning. Front Pediatr 2018;6:412. 
	
4	 Johnston S, Brenu EW, Staines D, et al. The prevalence of chronic 
fatigue syndrome/ myalgic encephalomyelitis: a meta-­analysis. Clin 
Epidemiol 2013;5:105–10. 
	
5	 Lim E-­J, Ahn Y-­C, Jang E-­S, et al. Systematic review and meta-­
analysis of the prevalence of chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME). J Transl Med 2020;18:100. 
	
6	 Falk Hvidberg M, Brinth LS, Olesen AV, et al. The Health-­Related 
Quality of Life for Patients with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis / Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS). PLoS One 2015;10:e0132421. 
	
7	 Al-­Aly Z, Bowe B, Xie Y. Long COVID after breakthrough SARS-­
CoV-­2 infection. Nat Med 2022;28:1461–7. 
	
8	 Davis HE, McCorkell L, Vogel JM, et al. Long COVID: major 
findings, mechanisms and recommendations. Nat Rev Microbiol 
2023;21:133–46. 
	
9	 Kedor C, Freitag H, Meyer-­Arndt L, et al. A prospective 
observational study of post-­COVID-­19 chronic fatigue syndrome 
following the first pandemic wave in Germany and biomarkers 
associated with symptom severity. Nat Commun 2022;13:5104. 
	 10	 Davis HE, Assaf GS, McCorkell L, et al. Characterizing long COVID 
in an international cohort: 7 months of symptoms and their impact. 
EClinicalMedicine 2021;38:101019. 
	 11	 Legler F, Meyer-­Arndt L, Mödl L, et al. Long-­term symptom 
severity and clinical biomarkers in post-­COVID-­19/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: results from a prospective observational cohort. 
EClinicalMedicine 2023;63:102146. 
	 12	 Paul BD, Lemle MD, Komaroff AL, et al. Redox imbalance 
links COVID-­19 and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2021;118:e2024358118. 
	 13	 Bynke A, Julin P, Gottfries C-­G, et al. Autoantibodies to beta-­
adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis (ME) patients - A validation study in plasma and 
cerebrospinal fluid from two Swedish cohorts. Brain Behav Immun 
Health 2020;7:100107. 
	 14	 Freitag H, Szklarski M, Lorenz S, et al. Autoantibodies to 
Vasoregulative G-­Protein-­Coupled Receptors Correlate with 
Symptom Severity, Autonomic Dysfunction and Disability in 
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. J Clin Med 
2021;10:3675. 
	 15	 Haffke M, Freitag H, Rudolf G, et al. Endothelial dysfunction and 
altered endothelial biomarkers in patients with post-­COVID-­19 
syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). J Transl Med 
2022;20:138. 
	 16	 Loebel M, Grabowski P, Heidecke H, et al. Antibodies to β 
adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in patients with 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 2016;52:32–9. 
	 17	 Mehlsen J, Brinth L, Pors K, et al. Autoimmunity in patients 
reporting long-­term complications after exposure to human 
papilloma virus vaccination. J Autoimmun 2022;133:102921. 
	 18	 Sotzny F, Filgueiras IS, Kedor C, et al. Dysregulated autoantibodies 
targeting vaso- and immunoregulatory receptors in Post COVID 
Syndrome correlate with symptom severity. Front Immunol 
2022;13:981532. 
	 19	 Szewczykowski C, Mardin C, Lucio M, et al. Long COVID: 
Association of Functional Autoantibodies against G-­Protein-­
Coupled Receptors with an Impaired Retinal Microcirculation. Int J 
Mol Sci 2022;23. 
	 20	 Wallukat G, Hohberger B, Wenzel K, et al. Functional autoantibodies 
against G-­protein coupled receptors in patients with persistent 
Long-­COVID-­19 symptoms. J Transl Autoimmun 2021;4:100100. 
	 21	 Fernandez-­Guerra P, Gonzalez-­Ebsen AC, Boonen SE, et al. 
Bioenergetic and Proteomic Profiling of Immune Cells in Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Patients: An 
Exploratory Study. Biomolecules 2021;11:961. 
	 22	 Fluge Ø, Mella O, Bruland O, et al. Metabolic profiling 
indicates impaired pyruvate dehydrogenase function in 
myalgic encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight 
2016;1:e89376. 
	 23	 Saha AK, Schmidt BR, Wilhelmy J, et al. Red blood cell 
deformability is diminished in patients with Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc 2019;71:113–6. 
	 24	 Sandvik MK, Sørland K, Leirgul E, et al. Endothelial dysfunction in 
ME/CFS patients. PLoS One 2023;18:e0280942. 
	 25	 Tomas C, Elson JL, Newton JL, et al. Substrate utilisation of 
cultured skeletal muscle cells in patients with CFS. Sci Rep 
2020;10:18232. 
	 26	 CampenC (Linda) MC vanRowe PC, Visser FC. Orthostatic 
Symptoms and Reductions in Cerebral Blood Flow in Long-­Haul 
COVID-­19 Patients: Similarities with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Medicina (B Aires) 2021;58:28. 
	 27	 Joseph P, Arevalo C, Oliveira RKF, et al. Insights From 
Invasive Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing of Patients With 
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Chest 
2021;160:642–51. 
	 28	 Schlick S, Lucio M, Wallukat G, et al. Post-­COVID-­19 Syndrome: 
Retinal Microcirculation as a Potential Marker for Chronic Fatigue. 
Int J Mol Sci 2022;23:13683. 
	 29	 van Campen CLMC, Verheugt FWA, Rowe PC, et al. Cerebral 
blood flow is reduced in ME/CFS during head-­up tilt testing even 
in the absence of hypotension or tachycardia: A quantitative, 
controlled study using Doppler echography. Clin Neurophysiol Pract 
2020;5:50–8. 
	 30	 Vernon SD, Funk S, Bateman L, et al. Orthostatic Challenge Causes 
Distinctive Symptomatic, Hemodynamic and Cognitive Responses 
in Long COVID and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome. Front Med 2022;9:917019. 

19
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
	 31	 Fluge Ø, Tronstad KJ, Mella O. Pathomechanisms and possible 
interventions in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS). J Clin Invest 2021;131:e150377. 
	 32	 Vernon SD, Zheng T, Do H, et al. Incidence and Prevalence 
of Post-­COVID-­19 Myalgic Encephalomyelitis: A Report from 
the Observational RECOVER-­Adult Study. J Gen Intern Med 
2025;40:1085–94. 
	 33	 Behrendt T, Bielitzki R, Behrens M, et al. Effects of Intermittent 
Hypoxia-­Hyperoxia on Performance- and Health-­Related Outcomes 
in Humans: A Systematic Review. Sports Med Open 2022;8:70. 
	 34	 Coimbra-­Costa D, Garzón F, Alva N, et al. Intermittent Hypobaric 
Hypoxic Preconditioning Provides Neuroprotection by Increasing 
Antioxidant Activity, Erythropoietin Expression and Preventing 
Apoptosis and Astrogliosis in the Brain of Adult Rats Exposed to 
Acute Severe Hypoxia. Int J Mol Sci 2021;22:5272. 
	 35	 Gangwar A, Paul S, Ahmad Y, et al. Intermittent hypoxia modulates 
redox homeostasis, lipid metabolism associated inflammatory 
processes and redox post-­translational modifications: Benefits at 
high altitude. Sci Rep 2020;10:7899. 
	 36	 Lee C-­C, Wu C-­Y, Yang H-­Y. Discoveries of how cells sense oxygen 
win the 2019 Nobel Prize in Physiology or medicine. Biomed J 
2020;43:434–7. 
	 37	 Padhy G, Gangwar A, Sharma M, et al. Plasma kallikrein-­bradykinin 
pathway promotes circulatory nitric oxide metabolite availability 
during hypoxia. Nitric Oxide 2016;55–56:36–44. 
	 38	 Soliz J, Schneider-­Gasser EM, Arias-­Reyes C, et al. Coping with 
hypoxemia: Could erythropoietin (EPO) be an adjuvant treatment of 
COVID-­19? Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2020;279:103476. 
	 39	 Doehner W, Fischer A, Alimi B, et al. Intermittent Hypoxic-­Hyperoxic 
Training During Inpatient Rehabilitation Improves Exercise Capacity 
and Functional Outcome in Patients With Long Covid: Results 
of a Controlled Clinical Pilot Trial. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 
2024;15:2781–91. 
	 40	 Kapel JS, Stokholm R, Elmengaard B, et al. Individualized 
Algorithm-­Based Intermittent Hypoxia Improves Quality of Life 
in Patients Suffering from Long-­Term Sequelae After COVID-­19 
Infection. J Clin Med 2025;14:14. 
	 41	 Zha S, Liu X, Yao Y, et al. Short-­term intermittent hypoxia exposure 
for dyspnea and fatigue in post-­acute sequelae of COVID-­19: A 
randomized controlled study. Respir Med 2024;232:107763. 
	 42	 Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, et al. Myalgic 
encephalomyelitis: International Consensus Criteria. J Intern Med 
2011;270:327–38. 
	 43	 Myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy)/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: diagnosis and management National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence: Guidelines. 2021.
	 44	 Ware JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-­ltem Short-­Form Health 
Survey (SF-­36). Med Care 1992;30:473–83. 
	 45	 Ware JE. SF-­36 health survey update. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 
2000;25:3130–9. 
	 46	 Bjorner JB, Damsgaard MT, Watt T, et al. Tests of data quality, 
scaling assumptions, and reliability of the Danish SF-­36. J Clin 
Epidemiol 1998;51:1001–11. 
	 47	 Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir-­Nash J, et al. The fatigue severity 
scale. Application to patients with multiple sclerosis and systemic 
lupus erythematosus. Arch Neurol 1989;46:1121–3. 
	 48	 Lorentzen K, Danielsen MA, Kay SD, et al. Validation of the 
Fatigue Severity Scale in Danish patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Dan Med J 2014;61:A4808.
	 49	 Sletten DM, Suarez GA, Low PA, et al. COMPASS 31: A Refined 
and Abbreviated Composite Autonomic Symptom Score. Mayo Clin 
Proc 2012;87:1196–201. 
	 50	 Newton JL, Okonkwo O, Sutcliffe K, et al. Symptoms of autonomic 
dysfunction in chronic fatigue syndrome. QJM 2007;100:519–26. 
	 51	 Wyller VB, Godang K, Mørkrid L, et al. Abnormal thermoregulatory 
responses in adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome: relation to 
clinical symptoms. Pediatrics 2007;120:e129–37. 
	 52	 Brinth L, Pors K, Mehlsn J, et al. Translation and linguistic validation 
of the Composite Autonomic Symptom Score COMPASS 31 in 
Danish. Dan Med J 2021;69:69.
	 53	 Sommerfelt K, Schei T, Seton KA, et al. Assessing Functional 
Capacity in Myalgic Encephalopathy/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A 
Patient-­Informed Questionnaire. J Clin Med 2024;13:3486. 
	 54	 Freynhagen R, Baron R, Gockel U, et al. painDETECT: a new 
screening questionnaire to identify neuropathic components in 
patients with back pain. Curr Med Res Opin 2006;22:1911–20. 
	 55	 Vaegter HB, Andersen PG, Madsen MF, et al. Prevalence of 
neuropathic pain according to the IASP grading system in patients 
with chronic non-­malignant pain. Pain Med 2014;15:120–7. 
	 56	 Brickenkamp R, Schmidt-­Atzert L, Liepmann D. D2 test of attention 
- revised. Hogrefe, 2015.
	 57	 Aoun Sebaiti M, Hainselin M, Gounden Y, et al. Systematic 
review and meta-­analysis of cognitive impairment in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Sci Rep 
2022;12:2157. 
	 58	 Cockshell SJ, Mathias JL. Cognitive functioning in chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a meta-­analysis. Psychol Med 2010;40:1253–67. 
	 59	 Cvejic E, Birch RC, Vollmer-­Conna U. Cognitive Dysfunction in 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: a Review of Recent Evidence. Curr 
Rheumatol Rep 2016;18:24. 
	 60	 Bates ME, Lemay EP. The d2 Test of attention: construct validity 
and extensions in scoring techniques. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 
2004;10:392–400. 
	 61	 Jäkel B, Kedor C, Grabowski P, et al. Hand grip strength and 
fatigability: correlation with clinical parameters and diagnostic 
suitability in ME/CFS. J Transl Med 2021;19:159. 
	 62	 Paffrath A, Kim L, Kedor C, et al. Impaired Hand Grip Strength 
Correlates with Greater Disability and Symptom Severity in Post-­
COVID Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. J 
Clin Med 2024;13:13. 
	 63	 Neu D, Mairesse O, Montana X, et al. Dimensions of pure chronic 
fatigue: psychophysical, cognitive and biological correlates in the 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Eur J Appl Physiol 2014;114:1841–51. 
	 64	 Jammes Y, Steinberg JG, Mambrini O, et al. Chronic fatigue 
syndrome: assessment of increased oxidative stress and altered 
muscle excitability in response to incremental exercise. J Intern 
Med 2005;257:299–310. 
	 65	 Ferrari M, Quaresima V. A brief review on the history of human 
functional near-­infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) development and 
fields of application. Neuroimage 2012;63:921–35. 
	 66	 Hamaoka T, McCully KK, Quaresima V, et al. Near-­infrared 
spectroscopy/imaging for monitoring muscle oxygenation and 
oxidative metabolism in healthy and diseased humans. J Biomed 
Opt 2007;12:062105. 
	 67	 Miller RR, Reid WD, Mattman A, et al. Submaximal exercise testing 
with near-­infrared spectroscopy in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome patients compared to healthy controls: a 
case-­control study. J Transl Med 2015;13:159. 
	 68	 Mclaughlin M, Sanal-­Hayes NEM, Hayes LD, et al. People with 
Long COVID and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome Exhibit Similarly Impaired Vascular Function. Am J Med 
2025;138:560–6. 
	 69	 Nunes M, Kell L, Slaghekke A, et al. Virus-­induced endothelial 
senescence as a cause and driving factor for ME/CFS and long 
COVID: mediated by a dysfunctional immune system. Cell Death 
Dis 2026;17:16. 
	 70	 Christopoulos EM, Tantanis D, Huang K, et al. Mapping cerebral 
blood flow in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(ME/CFS) and orthostatic intolerance: insights from a systematic 
review. J Transl Med 2025;23:963. 
	 71	 Issa A, Lin J-­MS, Chen Y, et al. Autonomic Dysfunction in Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): Findings 
from the Multi-­Site Clinical Assessment of ME/CFS (MCAM) Study 
in the USA. JCM 2025;14:6269. 
	 72	 Convertino VA, New Collective Author. Mechanisms of microgravity 
induced orthostatic intolerance: implications for effective 
countermeasures. J Gravit Physiol 2002;9:1–13.
	 73	 Stewart JM. Common Syndromes of Orthostatic Intolerance. 
Pediatrics 2013;131:968–80. 
	 74	 Winker R, Barth A, Bidmon D, et al. Endurance exercise training in 
orthostatic intolerance: a randomized, controlled trial. Hypertension 
2005;45:391–8. 
	 75	 Low PA, Sandroni P, Joyner M, et al. Postural tachycardia syndrome 
(POTS). J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2009;20:352–8. 
	 76	 Sheldon RS, Grubb BP 2nd, Olshansky B, et al. 2015 heart 
rhythm society expert consensus statement on the diagnosis 
and treatment of postural tachycardia syndrome, inappropriate 
sinus tachycardia, and vasovagal syncope. Heart Rhythm 
2015;12:e41–63. 
	 77	 Favilla CG, Carter SC, Atluri P, et al. Noninvasive finger 
plethysmography for continuous blood pressure monitoring 
in patients with left ventricular assist device. Artif Organs 
2023;47:1472–8. 
	 78	 Novak P. Hypocapnic cerebral hypoperfusion: A biomarker of 
orthostatic intolerance. PLoS One 2018;13:e0204419. 
	 79	 Rowe PC, Barron DF, Calkins H, et al. Orthostatic intolerance and 
chronic fatigue syndrome associated with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. 
J Pediatr 1999;135:494–9. 
	 80	 Novak P. 2011 Quantitative Autonomic Testing. JoVE. 
	 81	 Azcue N, Del Pino R, Acera M, et al. Dysautonomia and small 
fiber neuropathy in post-­COVID condition and Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome. J Transl Med 2023;21:814. 

20
Nochi M, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e117729. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-117729
Open access
	 82	 Casellini CM, Parson HK, Richardson MS, et al. Sudoscan, a 
Noninvasive Tool for Detecting Diabetic Small Fiber Neuropathy 
and Autonomic Dysfunction. Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics 
2013;15:948–53. 
	 83	 Backonja M-­M, Walk D, Edwards RR, et al. Quantitative sensory 
testing in measurement of neuropathic pain phenomena and other 
sensory abnormalities. Clin J Pain 2009;25:641–7. 
	 84	 Rolke R, Baron R, Maier C, et al. Quantitative sensory testing 
in the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain (DFNS): 
standardized protocol and reference values. Pain 2006;123:231–43. 
	 85	 Rolke R, Magerl W, Campbell KA, et al. Quantitative sensory 
testing: a comprehensive protocol for clinical trials. Eur J Pain 
2006;10:77–88. 
	 86	 Yarnitsky D. Quantitative sensory testing. Muscle Nerve 
1997;20:198–204. 
	 87	 Magerl W, Krumova EK, Baron R, et al. Reference data for 
quantitative sensory testing (QST): refined stratification for age 
and a novel method for statistical comparison of group data. Pain 
2010;151:598–605. 
	 88	 Meeus M, Nijs J, Meirleir KD. Chronic musculoskeletal pain in 
patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome: a systematic review. Eur 
J Pain 2007;11:377–86. 
	 89	 Üçeyler N, Zeller D, Kahn A-­K, et al. Small fibre pathology in 
patients with fibromyalgia syndrome. Brain 2013;136:1857–67. 
	 90	 Lauria G, Hsieh ST, Johansson O, et al. European Federation of 
Neurological Societies/Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on the 
use of skin biopsy in the diagnosis of small fiber neuropathy. Report 
of a joint task force of the European Federation of Neurological 
Societies and the Peripheral Nerve Society. Eur J Neurol 
2010;17:903–12, . 
	 91	 Lauria G, Lombardi R. Skin biopsy: a new tool for diagnosing 
peripheral neuropathy. BMJ 2007;334:1159–62. 
	 92	 Oaklander AL, Klein MM. Evidence of small-­fiber polyneuropathy in 
unexplained, juvenile-­onset, widespread pain syndromes. Pediatrics 
2013;131:e1091–100. 
	 93	 Karlsson P, Møller AT, Jensen TS, et al. Epidermal nerve fiber 
length density estimation using global spatial sampling in healthy 
subjects and neuropathy patients. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 
2013;72:186–93. 
	 94	 McArthur JC, Stocks EA, Hauer P, et al. Epidermal nerve fiber 
density: normative reference range and diagnostic efficiency. Arch 
Neurol 1998;55:1513–20. 
	 95	 Gibbons CH, Illigens BMW, Wang N, et al. Quantification of sweat 
gland innervation: a clinical-­pathologic correlation. Neurology 
2009;72:1479–86. 
	 96	 Kennedy WR. Wendelschafer-­Crabb G,Johnson T: Quantitation 
of epidermal nerves in diabetic neuropathy. Neurology 
1996;47:1042–8.
	 97	 Nolano M, Provitera V, Caporaso G, et al. Quantification of 
pilomotor nerves: a new tool to evaluate autonomic involvement in 
diabetes. Neurology 2010;75:1089–97. 
	 98	 Donadio V, Incensi A, Giannoccaro MP, et al. Peripheral autonomic 
neuropathy: diagnostic contribution of skin biopsy. J Neuropathol 
Exp Neurol 2012;71:1000–8. 
	 99	 Devigili G, Tugnoli V, Penza P, et al. The diagnostic criteria for 
small fibre neuropathy: from symptoms to neuropathology. Brain 
2008;131:1912–25. 
	100	 Azcue N, Teijeira‐Portas S, Tijero‐Merino B, et al. Small 
fiber neuropathy in the post‐COVID condition and Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Clinical 
significance and diagnostic challenges. Euro J of Neurology 
2025;32:e70016. 
	101	 Albrecht PJ, Hou Q, Argoff CE, et al. Excessive peptidergic 
sensory innervation of cutaneous arteriole-­venule shunts (AVS) 
in the palmar glabrous skin of fibromyalgia patients: implications 
for widespread deep tissue pain and fatigue. Pain Med 
2013;14:895–915. 
	102	 LittlejohnG, GuymerE. Neurogenic inflammation in fibromyalgia. 
Semin Immunopathol 2018;40:291–300.
	103	 Malik RA, Kallinikos P, Abbott CA, et al. Corneal confocal 
microscopy: a non-­invasive surrogate of nerve fibre damage and 
repair in diabetic patients. Diabetologia 2003;46:683–8. 
	104	 Petropoulos IN, Ponirakis G, Khan A, et al. Corneal 
confocal microscopy: ready for prime time. Clin Exp Optom 
2020;103:265–77. 
	105	 Tavakoli M, Malik RA. Corneal confocal microscopy: a novel non-­
invasive technique to quantify small fibre pathology in peripheral 
neuropathies. J Vis Exp 2011.:2194. 
	106	 Quattrini C, Tavakoli M, Jeziorska M, et al. Surrogate markers 
of small fiber damage in human diabetic neuropathy. Diabetes 
2007;56:2148–54. 
	107	 Chen X, Graham J, Dabbah MA, et al. An Automatic Tool for 
Quantification of Nerve Fibers in Corneal Confocal Microscopy 
Images. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2017;64:786–94. 
