Expert perspectives on Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome – Insights from the 3rd International Conference of the Charit´e 
Fatigue Center
Annick Fehrer a,*,1, Lara Windzio a,1, Simon Schoening b,1, Sophie Steiner a,1,  
Anna C. Aschenbrenner c, Nina Babel a,d,e, Uta Behrends f,g, Judith Bellmann-Strobl h,i,  
Guido Camm`a j, Alan Cash k, Wolfram Doehner d,l,m,n, Jeroen den Dunnen o, Øystein Fluge p,q,  
Christiana Franke j, Kathryn Hoffmann r, Claudia Kedor a, Laura Kim a, Wiebke L¨ohden s,  
Olav Mella p,q, Lorenz L. Mihatsch f, Michael J. Peluso t, Christian Puta u,v,w, David Putrino x,  
Anuradha Ramoji y,z, Wakiro Sato aa, Birgit Sawitzki ab, Georg Schlieper ac,  
Yehuda Schoenfeld ad, Martina Seifert a,m, Fridbj¨orn Sigurdsson ae, Anouk Slaghekke af,  
Kristian Sommerfelt ag, Franziska Sotzny a, Elisa Stein a, Juergen M. Steinacker ah,  
Michael Stingl ai, David M. Systrom aj, Karl J. Tronstad ak, Klaus Wirth al,am,  
Bernhard W¨ormann an,ao, Rob C.I. Wüst af, Takashi Yamamura ap,  
Carmen Scheibenbogen a
a Institute of Medical Immunology, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin and Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin and Berlin 
Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
b ME/CFS Research Foundation, Hamburg, Germany
c Systems Medicine, Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), Bonn, Germany
d Berlin Institute of Health (BIH) Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
e Center for Translational Medicine and Immune Diagnostics Laboratory, University Hospital of the Ruhr-University Bochum, Herne, Germany
f Munich Chronic Fatigue Center for Young People (MCFC), Children's Hospital, TUM School of Medicine and Health, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
g German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich, Germany
h Experimental and Clinical Research Center, A Cooperation between the Max Delbrück Center (MDC) for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association and Charit´e – 
Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
i NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin, Berlin Institute 
of Health, and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany
j Department of Neurology and Experimental Neurology, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin and Humboldt-Universit¨at Zu 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany
k Terra Biological LLC, San Diego, CA, USA
l Deutsches Herzzentrum der Charit´e (DHZC), Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Berlin, Germany
m DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Berlin, Berlin, Germany
n Centre for Stroke Research Berlin, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
o Center for Infection and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam Institute for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands
p The Cancer Clinic, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway
q Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
r Department of Primary Care Medicine, Center for Public Health, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
s Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, Nutriinformatics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany
t Division of HIV Infectious Diseases and Global Medicine at Zuckerberg San Francisco General, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
u Department of Sports Medicine and Health Promotion, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany
v Department for Internal Medicine IV (Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases), Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany
w Center for Sepsis Control and Care (CSCC), Jena University Hospital/Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany
x Department of Rehabilitation and Human Performance, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
y Institute of Physical Chemistry (IPC) and Abbe Center of Photonics (ACP), Member of the Leibniz Centre for Photonics in Infection Research (LPI), Friedrich-Schiller- 
University Jena, Jena, Germany
* Corresponding author at: Annick Fehrer Charit´e - Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin Institute of Medical Immunology Campus Virchow Klinikum, Augustenburger Platz 
1/ Südstraße 2, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
E-mail address: annick.fehrer@charite.de (A. Fehrer). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Autoimmunity Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/autrev
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2026.104043
Received 12 August 2025; Received in revised form 10 March 2026; Accepted 25 March 2026  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
Available online 25 March 2026 
1568-9972/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

z Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology, Member of Leibniz Health Technologies, Member of the Leibniz Centre for Photonics in Infection Research (LPI), Jena, 
Germany
aa Section of Research and Development Strategy, Translational Medical Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan
ab Translational Immunology, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin and Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin and Berlin Institute 
of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
ac Center for Hypertension, Kidney- and Metabolic Diseases Hannover, Hannover, Germany
ad Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel, affiliated to Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel
ae Landspitali – The National University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland
af Department of Human Movement Sciences, Faculty of Behavioral and Movement Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands
ag Children and Youth Clinic, Institute of Clinical Medicine 2, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
ah Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine Research at Ulm University, Ulm, Germany
ai Department of Neurology, Zentrum Votivpark, Vienna, Austria
aj Brigham and Women's Hospital, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
ak Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
al Institute of General Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital Frankfurt, Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany
am Mitodicure GmbH, Kriftel, Germany
an German Association of Hematology and Oncology (DGHO), Berlin, Germany
ao Division of Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology, Department of Medicine, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
ap Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS)
Post-COVID syndrome
Long COVID
COVID-19
Biomarker
Pathophysiology
Therapeutic strategies
A B S T R A C T
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a complex, multisystemic disorder mostly 
triggered by viral infections, with core symptoms including post-exertional malaise (PEM), fatigue, pain, and 
cognitive dysfunction. Its prevalence has increased significantly in the context of the coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) pandemic. Despite its severity and impact on patients' quality of life, ME/CFS remains poorly un­
derstood. On May 12 and 13, 2025, the 3rd International Conference hosted by the Charit´e Fatigue Center 
brought together nearly 200 researchers from various disciplines on-site, and around 3,700 participants online to 
discuss recent advances in ME/CFS research, diagnostics, clinical care, and therapeutic trials. The program 
featured 33 lectures by international experts on key topics such as post-COVID syndrome (PCS), care structures, 
and pathophysiological mechanisms including cardiovascular dysregulation, immune dysregulation, autoim­
mune mechanisms, and metabolic dysfunction. In addition, results from clinical trials addressing disease 
mechanisms, including those specifically targeting autoantibodies, were presented. While public awareness and 
funding opportunities have increased in the wake of the pandemic and the emergence of PCS, ME/CFS remains 
severely underresearched. Sustained and adequately funded research efforts are urgently required to advance 
understanding, identify diagnostic markers, and develop targeted therapeutic interventions.
1. Introduction
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a 
multisystemic disorder, classified as a neurological condition (ICD-10 
G93.3). In most cases, it is triggered by viral infections, such as with 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), influenza viruses, or, more recently, severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Core symp­
toms include fatigue, sleep disturbances, autonomic and cognitive 
dysfunction, pain, and post-exertional malaise (PEM). The latter refers 
to an inappropriate worsening of symptoms following physical or 
mental exertion. ME/CFS affected an estimated 0.2-1.4% of the popu­
lation pre-pandemic, [1,2], with prevalence strongly increasing due to 
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic [3]. Around 50% of 
patients with ME/CFS are unable to work, 25% are severely affected, 
and a subset is bedbound. Despite the substantial burden, there is still no 
specific treatment or adequate medical care [4–8]. While the patho­
physiology remains incompletely understood, increasing evidence im­
plicates dysregulation of the immune, nervous, metabolic, and vascular 
systems. There is an overlap with post-acute infection syndromes (PAIS) 
which demonstrate similar symptom profiles irrespective of the infec­
tious agent [7,9]. The striking similarities in the clinical picture of post- 
COVID syndrome (PCS) – also termed Long COVID or post-acute 
sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) – with a subset fulfilling diagnostic 
criteria of ME/CFS have boosted scientific and public attention to ME/ 
CFS and offers an unprecedented opportunity to advance understanding, 
identify biomarkers, and develop effective therapies. Building on the 
insights summarized in the 2023 conference report [10], this year’s two- 
day-meeting started on May 12, 2025 – international ME/CFS awareness 
day – and aimed to further consolidate emerging research and foster 
interdisciplinary exchange on ME/CFS and PCS.
2. Post-infectious syndromes – lessons from the COVID-19 
pandemic
David Putrino opened the conference by outlining key insights into 
infection-associated chronic illnesses (IACIs) gained during the COVID- 
19 pandemic. IACIs are an umbrella term for long-term conditions that 
are triggered by infections and include PAIS. During hospital overload in 
the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, the use of remote patient 
monitoring (RPM) technology facilitated patient care while enabling the 
collection of clinical data, revealing persistent symptoms in approxi­
mately 15% of cases [11,12]. Emerging evidence for multi-organ 
involvement in Long COVID [13] supported hypotheses of pathobio­
logical mechanisms, including immune dysregulation, viral persistence 
and reactivation, microbiota dysbiosis, autoimmunity, as well as 
vascular and nervous system impairment [14]. Hallmarks of IACIs such 
as endothelial dysfunction and associated coagulopathy – with increased 
fibrinogen deposition, platelet hyperactivity, and red blood cell abnor­
malities – were identified [15]. Neurological deficits attributed to neu­
roinflammation were observed even after mild acute illness [16] and 
immunoglobulins isolated from patients with persistent symptoms 
lasting longer than six weeks after SARS-CoV-2 infection showed 
increased reactivity against neural tissue [17]. Putrino also presented 
preliminary data on sex differences in Long COVID symptom pre­
sentations, showing that low testosterone levels were associated with 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
2 

female-typical and low estradiol levels with male-typical symptom­
atology, with hormone levels correlating with respective symptom 
severity. To advance treatment options, he emphasized the need to 
address viral persistence and the reactivation of latent viruses [18–20], 
the recognition of metabolic dysfunction rather than deconditioning as 
the driver of post-exertional symptoms [21], and concluded by under­
scoring the complexity of IACIs, emphasizing the necessity of individ­
ualized profiling for effective patient care.
ME/CFS has long been neglected and underfunded, but the emer­
gence of PCS as a PAIS has accelerated research progress. As presented 
by Carmen Scheibenbogen, this shift has led to increased public 
awareness, funding, and the establishment of new biomedical studies 
and research groups. PEM and fatigue, core symptoms of ME/CFS, were 
identified early on as frequent symptoms in PCS as well [22]. A 2022 
observational study at the Charit´e Fatigue Center in Berlin, Germany, 
showed that approximately half of the patients presenting with persis­
tent moderate to severe fatigue and exertional intolerance following 
mild to moderate COVID-19 after World Health Organization (WHO) 
criteria fulfilled the Canadian Consensus Criteria (CCC) for diagnosis of 
ME/CFS [23], with a 2-year follow-up showing little improvement and 
persistent chronic symptomatology [24]. Current evidence suggests that 
dysregulation of the immune system, including the presence of auto­
antibodies, and an imbalance of the autonomic nervous system are key 
underlying pathomechanisms of the condition. Autoantibodies targeting 
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) such as adrenergic or muscarinic 
receptors, have been shown to correlate with symptom severity in PCS 
and ME/CFS [25–30]. PCS studies have also contributed to a better 
understanding of ME/CFS associated metabolic dysfunction, with most 
intriguing findings originating from skeletal muscle studies showing 
severe impairment of muscle force [23,24,31] as well as metabolic 
[21,32–34], mitochondrial, and microvascular dysfunction [21,35]. 
Scheibenbogen emphasized the urgent need for international collabo­
ration and presented a declaration advocating for coordinated efforts in 
research and therapeutic development. Advances in ME/CFS research 
are increasingly driven by insights from post-infectious cohorts, 
including PCS, offering a unique opportunity to advance understanding 
and treatment of ME/CFS. According to the ME/CFS Research Founda­
tion, PCS and ME/CFS resulted in more than €60 billion in societal costs 
in Germany in 2024, and modelling suggests persistently high ongoing 
costs in 2025 and beyond [36]. This considerable cost burden highlights 
that investing in research is not only urgently needed but also very cost- 
effective in the long run.
3. Care for ME/CFS
Uta Behrends outlined the work of PEDNET-LC, a nationwide pe­
diatric network in Germany that aims to establish sustainable, state-of- 
the-art care and research for children and adolescents living with PCS, 
similar post-acute infection and vaccination syndromes (PAIVS), and 
ME/CFS [37]. Key pillars of the project are the establishment of 20 
interdisciplinary “Comprehensive Care Centers of Long COVID” (CCC- 
LC), two specialized pediatric pain clinics, three specialized rehabilita­
tion clinics, and eight institutes for medical informatics and health 
services research. PEDNET-LC focusses on multidisciplinary, sustainable 
national research and telemedical infrastructure, evidence generation 
and translation, educational programs, the perspectives of medical 
professionals, patients, and parents, clinical and translational studies, as 
well as linked analysis of registry and health insurance data. Patients 
with complex symptoms that caused participation deficits, PEM, and/or 
ME/CFS will be referred to their regional CCC-LC for screening and 
needs-based diagnostics. Structured patient-reported data and data from 
medical visits are being fed into the network’s PAIVS-MECFS-Registry, 
which integrates and expands upon the preceding, state-funded 
German ME/CFS registry (MECFS-R) [38] and the Multicenter Long 
COVID Registry (MLC-R) [39]. Large medical datasets together with 
standardized biosamples from patients with PAIVS and/or ME/CFS as 
well as from disease controls with similar symptoms but other diagnoses 
provide the basis for the identification of biomarkers and therapeutic 
targets in translational studies. In sum, the network integrates more than 
90 research partners, including clinicians, scientists, health insurance 
companies, medical and professional associations, as well as patient 
organizations.
An introduction to the National Reference Center for Post-viral 
Syndromes in Austria was provided by Kathryn Hoffmann [40]. Hos­
ted by the Medical University of Vienna, and sponsored by the Austrian 
Federal Ministry of Health, this first-of-its-kind center brings together 
expertise from multiple medical disciplines working in close cooperation 
with social insurance providers and patient organizations. Its interdis­
ciplinary work is focused on knowledge processing, the promotion of 
national and international collaboration, and support for clinical and 
research exchange. While the center itself does not provide direct 
medical care to patients, it aims to serve as a central knowledge hub to 
indirectly improve overall medical care and research by offering 
training to medical professionals – including assessors – and by 
disseminating information, such as the recently released consensus- 
based treatment recommendations, to both practitioners and patients 
[41,42]. Given the urgent need for standardized care for people living 
with post-viral syndromes in Austria, the center aims to foster the 
establishment of dedicated treatment structures.
Another effort to improve the medical care situation of people living 
with ME/CFS on a national level was presented by Fridbj¨orn Sigurds­
son. The Akureyri Clinic in Iceland provides medical care to patients 
across the country and coordinates healthcare services nationwide, 
partnering with the national university hospital, rehabilitation centers, 
and medical professionals. The clinic takes its name from the town of 
Akureyri, where a localized and well-documented outbreak of ME/CFS 
occurred in the late 1940s, sparking some of the earliest debates around 
the disease’s etiology and appropriate terminology [43–47]. To date, the 
clinic’s interdisciplinary staff has seen around 400 new patients referred 
to them, mostly from general practitioners, with around half diagnosed 
with PCS. While the clinic has been tasked with developing a nationwide 
ME/CFS and PCS registry and currently collects clinical data, using well- 
established instruments, such as the Functional Capacity Questionnaire 
(FUNCAP55) [48], additional funding and personnel are required to 
enable the implementation of a fully operational registry and biobank, 
as well as the establishment of a collaborative research center.
Claudia Kedor introduced the CFS_CARE study at the Charit´e Fa­
tigue Center in Berlin, Germany, which investigated the effectiveness of 
an interdisciplinary care model for patients fulfilling the CCC for diag­
nosis of ME/CFS [49]. Interventions included diagnostic assessments, 
and personalized therapy such as pacing, sleep and pain management, 
nutritional guidance, and social support, aiming to ameliorate symp­
toms and improve physical health and occupational participation. A 
total of 240 ME/CFS patients with a disease duration between 6 months 
and 5 years were randomly assigned to an intervention or a matched 
control group. Therapeutic implementation included a 5-week stay at 
the Bavaria Kreischa rehabilitation clinic, and regular evaluations at the 
ME/CFS outpatient clinic for the intervention group, while controls 
remained under the care of the referring physicians. Although the 
rehabilitation program was tailored to ME/CFS with pacing and indi­
vidualized flexibility, over 50% of patients reported experiencing a PEM 
episode during their stay. A total of 77% felt that their condition had 
improved as a result of the rehabilitation, and 74% reported feeling 
more capable of coping with their illness. Despite this positive assess­
ment, preliminary results indicate that physical functioning assessed via 
the Short Form 36 (SF-36) health survey did not improve at 12 months 
[50]. These findings suggest that rehabilitation programs are not uni­
versally beneficial for individuals with ME/CFS, and that symptomatic 
therapy has no significant impact on the clinical course of the disease. A 
comprehensive analysis of the study is currently ongoing to identify 
patient subgroups more likely to benefit from rehabilitation in­
terventions as well as those for whom such interventions may be 
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
3 

contraindicated or ineffective.
Michael Stingl outlined his experience in the neurological outpa­
tient care of ME/CFS patients in Vienna, Austria, having evaluated more 
than 1,000 suspected cases. His approach to diagnosing ME/CFS focuses 
on the assessment of PEM – the hallmark symptom of ME/CFS – using 
questionnaires and hand grip strength (HGS) testing [51], alongside a 
thorough evaluation of differential diagnoses and comorbidities. Stingl 
routinely discusses PEM with patients over the course of their disease, 
and repeatedly educates them on the concept of pacing, including the 
psychological implications of adhering to a strict pacing regime. Iden­
tifying and treating common comorbidities, such as postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome (POTS), small fiber neuropathy (SFN), mast cell 
activation syndrome (MCAS), immunodeficiencies, hypermobility, and 
psychological conditions, can reduce the individual symptom burden 
[41]. Given the limited evidence for pharmacological interventions in 
ME/CFS, off-label drug treatment should be critically evaluated with 
regards to its efficacy and tolerability and should be tapered or dis­
continued if no benefit is evident. If pharmacological intervention re­
sults in a stable, gradual improvement, additional treatments may only 
be administered restrictively. The overall therapeutic goal is to raise the 
threshold for PEM and improve quality of life. Lastly, the documentation 
of functional impairments using the FUNCAP55 questionnaire [48], and 
the evaluation of the need for care assistance, particularly in severely 
affected patients, are additional building blocks in the holistic care for 
ME/CFS patients.
The challenge of off-label drug use for PCS in Germany was 
addressed by Bernhard W¨ormann. Coordinated by the German Federal 
Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM), an expert commission 
has been convened to develop recommendations for the pharmacolog­
ical treatment of symptoms associated with PCS [52]. Several pharma­
ceutical candidates were evaluated in an evidence-based research 
approach for their potential efficacy in the treatment of PCS. A literature 
review of the selected drugs yielded 41 articles suitable for inclusion, out 
of a total of more than 1,600 initially identified publications, high­
lighting the significant research gap in PCS drug treatment. W¨ormann 
presented evidence for the potential symptom relief and/or improve­
ment of health-related quality of life of antidepressants (vortioxetine, 
agomelatine) [53–57], ivabradine [58,59], and low-dose naltrexone 
[60]. Additionally, a small number of clinical studies were identified 
investigating beta-blockers, glucocorticoids, midodrine, and pyrido­
stigmine in related conditions, such as ME/CFS and POTS. In contrast, 
no studies fulfilling the inclusion criteria were found evaluating statins, 
aripiprazole, and metformin in PCS or related conditions. However, the 
commission reviewed studies reporting a significant protective effect of 
low dose metformin against the development of PCS when administered 
during acute COVID-19 [61]. Upon finalizing their recommendations, 
the expert commission’s decision will be submitted to the federal joint 
committee (G-BA) for inclusion into the pharmaceutical guideline.
Kristian Sommerfelt presented findings from an online survey on 
the situation of people living with severe and very severe ME/CFS in 
Norway, as diagnosed by their physicians [62]. His team developed the 
Activities of Daily Living Score (ADLS), which evaluates energy expen­
diture across 15 activities in four domains: motor (e.g. leaving the 
house), communication (e.g. having a conversation), general daily ac­
tivities (e.g. unassisted eating), and basic hygiene (e. g. showering). 
Each item is weighted by energy use and frequency. Severity classifi­
cation is based on the International Consensus Criteria (ICC) for ME/CFS 
[63]. Among 491 respondents, 47 were classified as very severe, 444 as 
severe, and 95 as moderate. Most (88%) were female, 11% 19 years or 
younger, 43% aged 20-39, and 46% over 40. Notably, 19% of very 
severely affected were under 19 years, and 43% reported disease onset 
before age 15. Nearly half (45%) lived with their parents. Fatigue, pain, 
brain fog, sleep disturbance, and sensory intolerance were the most 
burdensome symptoms. Intolerance to sunlight or sound worsened with 
disease severity. Key differentiators between severe and very severe ME/ 
CFS were the ability to get out of bed, dress, or shower. Only 60% of 
severely and very severely affected received health or social care, with 
many reporting negative experiences and only 15% satisfied with spe­
cialists’ services. In contrast, home nursing services, general practi­
tioners, and therapists were evaluated more positively. Family 
caregivers had a predominantly negative perception of their own 
situation.
4. Pathophysiology of ME/CFS
An overview of the pathophysiological mechanisms discussed at the 
conference and their corresponding speakers is provided in Figure 1.
4.1. Cardiovascular dysregulation and mitochondrial pathology
David M. Systrom elaborated on circulatory dysfunction in ME/ 
CFS. Invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing (iCPET), originally 
developed to detect early cardiac disease and pulmonary hypertension, 
has proven exceedingly valuable in investigating exertional intolerance 
among ME/CFS and PCS patients. During iCPET, patients perform up­
right exercise on a stationary bicycle, while undergoing continuous 
monitoring of ventilation and respiratory gas exchange via mouthpiece 
and comprehensive physiological assessment through catheters placed 
in the pulmonary and radial arteries. The invasive measurements are 
particularly crucial for identifying abnormalities in blood flow and ox­
ygen extraction. Systrom described a reduced maximal oxygen uptake 
(VO2 max) in ME/CFS patients and two types of neurovascular dysre­
gulation as potential contributing factors. The reduction in VO2 max was 
attributed either to a reduced preload, characterized by diminished 
venous return that results in inadequate ventricular filling prior to car­
diac contraction, or to impaired oxygen extraction, likely due to vascular 
dysregulation or small fiber neuropathy in patients diagnosed with ME/ 
CFS according to Institute of Medicine (IOM) criteria [32]. In a prom­
ising randomized controlled trial, pyridostigmine (Mestinon) treatment 
demonstrated improvements in exercise capacity among ME/CFS pa­
tients with preload failure who met IOM criteria [64]. These findings 
support the potential of neuroactive therapies as an approach for 
addressing exercise-induced fatigue and impaired oxygen-supply.
Christian Puta emphasized that the ME/CFS key symptom PEM 
likely involves multiple pathophysiological mechanisms rather than a 
single cause. This is indicated by the variability in PEM onset, duration, 
severity and the complex interaction between physical and cognitive 
exertion [13]. Currently discussed potential mechanisms underlying 
PEM include microvascular dysfunction leading to hypoperfusion and 
hypoxia, mitochondrial dysregulation, and (auto)immune dysregulation 
triggered by exercise or infection or the interaction of exercise and 
infection [65]. In PCS, an impaired cardiopulmonary response with 
systemic and peripheral oxygen extraction is evident [32,66], along with 
abnormal erythrocyte morphology and increased oxygen affinity driving 
hypoperfusion [67–69]. Metabolic and mitochondrial dysfunction 
worsen with induction of PEM in PCS patients, potentially due to viral 
reactivation and interference with mitochondrial proteins and gene 
expression, as seen in acute COVID-19 [21,70]. Additionally, altered 
frequency of regulatory T cells, which normally protect muscle mito­
chondria from interferon-γ-mediated damage [71], might contribute to 
mitochondrial dysfunction in PCS patients [72].
Rob C. I. Wüst presented his group’s recent findings on skeletal 
muscle dysfunction in ME/CFS and PCS with particular emphasis on 
PEM. The researchers took skeletal muscle biopsies both before and one 
day after maximal cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET), to assess 
exercise capacity and to study the effects of exercise and PEM. Based on 
this methodology, they demonstrated worsened muscle abnormalities 
following exercise in 23 PCS patients who met WHO diagnostic criteria 
[21]. Several key factors that may contribute to reduced exercise ca­
pacity have been identified, including impaired mitochondrial respira­
tion, elevated concentrations of fatigue-related metabolites, increased 
prevalence of glycolytic fiber and diminished power-output per muscle 
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
4 

cross-sectional area. Moreover, PEM was linked to rapid local and sys­
temic metabolic changes, exercise-induced markers for muscle damage, 
and infiltration of immune cells and amyloid-like structures into skeletal 
muscle. A recent follow-up study comparing muscle changes caused by 
exercise in PCS and ME/CFS patients fulfilling the CCC versus a 60-day 
bed rest healthy control group found a comparable reduction in VO2 
max [73]. However, compared to bed rest-induced alterations, fiber 
types were differentially affected. In addition, patients, particularly 
those with ME/CFS, exhibited reduced capillary density and decreased 
capillary-to-fiber ratio, potentially impairing metabolite removal, as 
well as oxygen and nutrient delivery to tissue. These findings suggest 
that PEM stems from specific pathological mechanisms rather than 
simple deconditioning. This conclusion was further supported by pre­
liminary data on microvascular alterations, particularly basement 
membrane thickening and reduced lumen size in ME/CFS and PCS pa­
tients, which may serve as potential diagnostic biomarkers.
Juergen M. Steinacker presented recent findings on muscle mito­
chondrial dysfunction identified via muscle biopsies, mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) capacity measurements, electron 
microscopy, and CPET protocols in patients with fatigue or post-COVID- 
19 pathology diagnosed with either ME/CFS according to the CCC or 
classified as PCS [74]. Structural mitochondrial damage, including 
cristae loss, reduced mitochondrial area, and sarcomere damage, was 
found in both ME/CFS and PCS. Notably, OXPHOS capacity measure­
ments revealed significantly decreased complex-1 activity among PCS 
patients. In a complementary study comparing performance of athletes 
before and after SARS-CoV-2 infection, Steinacker’s group demonstrated 
that even convalescent athletes exhibited a VO2 max reduction of 
approximately 5%, while athletes with persistent symptoms showed 
even more severe decreases [75]. Given the absence of significant car­
diac pathology, mitochondrial and consecutive slight muscular 
dysfunction appear to be plausible. Supporting evidence from Guarnieri 
et al. demonstrated SARS-CoV-2-infection-induced downregulation of 
mitochondrial genes [70]. Consequently, mitochondrial dysfunction 
may interfere with cellular metabolism, transport systems, and intra­
cellular ion homeostasis and points to post-acute viral mechanism 
common in PCS and ME/CFS.
Klaus Wirth presented a comprehensive disease concept for PCS and 
ME/CFS, centered on exercise intolerance and PEM, along with a 
derived therapeutic strategy [76]. The model focuses on a vicious circle 
involving perfusion disturbances, intracellular sodium and calcium 
overload, and mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle. Impaired 
microcirculation in skeletal muscle leads to proton accumulation and 
sodium influx via NHE1, while insufficient stimulation of Na+/K+- 
ATPase due to β2-adrenergic receptor dysfunction and reduced 
calcitonin-gene related peptide (CGRP) further promote sodium over­
load [77]. Elevated intracellular sodium reverses the sodium-calcium 
exchanger (NCX), resulting in calcium influx and mitochondrial cal­
cium overload, which impairs ATP production and increases reactive 
oxygen species [78]. Over time, this leads to cumulative mitochondrial 
damage, reduced regenerative capacity, and progressive muscle 
dysfunction [21]. Clinical and imaging data support this model, showing 
elevated intramuscular sodium in ME/CFS patients after exercise, 
correlating with fatigue and loss of force [34]. The model links transient 
membrane depolarization during PEM to persistent depolarization in 
severely affected patients, explaining symptoms such as fatigue, 
Fig. 1. Pathophysiological mechanisms of ME/CFS as discussed at the 3rd international ME/CFS conference. Topics are assigned to their respective speakers. [160]
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
5 

fasciculations, and muscle cramps. Risk factors such as autoantibodies 
against regulatory GPCRs [79] modulate individual vulnerability, 
potentially by contributing to receptor dysfunction. The proposed 
therapeutic strategy aims to interrupt the vicious circle by restoring 
membrane potential and mitochondrial function, for example through 
pharmacological stimulation of Na+/K+-ATPase and mitochondrial 
calcium efflux.
In his presentation, Karl J. Tronstad discussed recent findings on 
alterations in blood metabolites and proteins in ME/CFS patients, 
addressing both acute and persistent changes. Beyond previously 
documented exertion-triggered abnormalities such as lactate over­
production during activity [80], persistent metabolic modifications 
including alternative energy source utilization, altered key enzymes and 
proteins, and dysregulated metabolic hormones have been reported 
[81,82]. These metabolic changes are typically triggered by exercise, 
starvation, hypoxia, or chronic diseases, and therefore possibly suggest 
amplified hypoxic effects in ME/CFS. These result in a metabolic shift 
toward increased glycolysis and reduced oxidative phosphorylation, 
creating persistent energy stress adaptations through intrinsic regula­
tory mechanisms. Here, the hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) could 
play a central role as a transcriptional regulator suppressing mito­
chondrial oxidative phosphorylation and inhibiting pyruvate dehydro­
genase [81]. Cellular counteractive mechanisms attempt to compensate 
by maintaining ATP production and providing alternative fuel sources 
[81]. Tronstad presented preliminary proteome data revealing alter­
ations in over 1,800 serum protein targets in ME/CFS patients, 
demonstrating multiorgan impact, immune dysregulation, and meta­
bolic adaptations [83]. These multiscale patterns converge toward a 
unified mechanism involving immune, vascular, and metabolic dysre­
gulation in ME/CFS pathophysiology.
4.2. Immune dysregulation and autoimmune mechanisms
Jeroen den Dunnen presented evidence supporting autoimmunity 
as a central mechanism in PCS and ME/CFS. Building on prior models in 
fibromyalgia [84], his group reproduced PCS symptoms in mice via 
passive transfer of patient derived serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) [85]. 
A total of 34 PCS patients were diagnosed according to WHO criteria, 
recruited at the post-COVID-19 clinic of the Amsterdam University 
Medical Center, and stratified into subgroups based on biomarker pro­
files: one with elevated neuronal damage markers, another with 
elevated type I interferons (IFNs) and dysregulated muscle markers, and 
a third with no elevated markers. IgG from the second group reduced 
mobility in mice and IgG from all subgroups induced varying levels of 
increased pain sensitivity, leading to the conclusions that IgG plays a 
causative role in the pathomechanism of PCS and is symptom-specific. 
Similar studies from other groups have validated these findings 
[17,86]. Proteomics analysis of over 21,000 autoantigens revealed 
heterogeneous specificity profiles for PCS patients with diverse neuronal 
and muscle antigen targets. Additionally, den Dunnen presented find­
ings of in vitro impairment and cell death of skeletal muscle cells 
cultured in the presence of 5% plasma from PCS patients. As an outlook, 
he expressed his ambitions to establish in vivo and in vitro models for 
PCS and ME/CFS to serve as platforms for testing therapies, screening 
drugs, and developing diagnostic tools, including autoantibody panel 
tests for individual phenotyping of patients.
In an effort to further characterize autoantibodies in ME/CFS and 
PCS, Franziska Sotzny presented data on autoantibodies targeting po­
tential epitopes that mimic EBV antigens [79]. These findings were 
based on high-throughput peptide microarrays identifying elevated 
antibody responses against arginine rich peptides derived from EBV 
proteins in ME/CFS patients diagnosed using the CCC [87,88]. Sequence 
homologies to human proteins involved in vascular, metabolic, and 
neurological signaling, were identified. A total of 45 PCS patients 
suffering from moderate to severe fatigue and exertion intolerance at 
least six months after COVID-19, of whom 26 fulfilled the CCC for 
diagnosis of ME/CFS, were recruited at the Charit´e Fatigue Center in 
Berlin, Germany, to investigate IgG responses to the identified peptide 
sequences. This revealed enhanced IgG reactivity against several argi­
nine rich human peptides (derived from ion channel SLC24A3, TSPYL2, 
TSPYL5, and the neuronal antigen SRRM3) and in a subsequent step also 
to α-adrenergic receptor and TSPYL2 protein. Correlation analysis 
showed that IgG reactivity against most arginine-rich peptides was 
associated with fatigue, PEM, and autonomic dysfunction. IgG reactivity 
against a peptide sequence of the neuronal antigen SRRM3 correlated 
with cognitive impairment and against full-length TSPYL5 with cogni­
tive impairment, muscle pain and headache [79].
Christiana Franke discussed the growing relevance of autoanti­
bodies targeting neuronal surface antigens in neurological disease 
research [89]. She highlighted their increasing influence on diagnostics 
and treatment, whether their role is causative, contributory, or unclear. 
In patients with neurological symptoms during acute COVID-19, a high 
frequency of cerebrospinal fluid autoantibodies, but no COVID-19 spe­
cific pattern was identified [90]. Similar findings, alongside persistent 
complement activation and thromboinflammation, were reported in PCS 
patients with cognitive dysfunction [91,92]. Based on this, two double- 
blinded, randomized clinical trials were initiated at the Charit´e in Berlin, 
Germany: the placebo-controlled PoCoVIT trial testing methylprednis­
olone in PCS patients with predominant cognitive dysfunction [93,94], 
and the sham-controlled IA-PACS-CFS trial, evaluating immu­
noadsorption in 66 post-infectious ME/CFS patients fulfilling the CCC 
[95,96]. Results from the two trials are pending.
Although COVID-19 vaccinations offer partial protection against PCS 
[97], some individuals develop persistent symptoms, termed post- 
COVID vaccination syndrome (PCVS). Franke presented data demon­
strating autoantibodies binding to peripheral nerve structures in PCVS 
patients with peripheral sensory deficits [98]. In ME/CFS, prior studies 
identified neuronal autoantibodies [99,100]. However, a recent report 
investigating 7,542 autoantibody-antigen interactions found no overall 
group differences, although ME/CFS patients showed increased reac­
tivity to herpesviruses, including EBV, and generally higher autoanti­
body levels in women [101]. Franke concluded by emphasizing the 
heterogeneity of PCS and ME/CFS and the need for biomarker-based 
subtype classification in clinical care.
Takashi Yamamura discussed recent findings on GPCR autoanti­
bodies in ME/CFS from a neuroimmunological perspective. In 2019, his 
group identified microstructural brain changes potentially linked to 
cognitive dysfunction in ME/CFS patients fulfilling the CCC, Fukuda, 
and IOM diagnostic criteria, particularly in the right superior longitu­
dinal fasciculus, by diffusional kurtosis imaging (DKI) and neurite 
orientation dispersion and density imaging (NODDI) [102]. To explore 
autoimmune mechanisms, they examined autoantibodies against β1/β2- 
adrenergic and M3/M4-muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and 
confirmed elevated levels in Japanese patients, consistent with prior 
findings from Germany [25,99]. Furthermore, levels of autoantibodies 
correlated with brain abnormalities; adrenergic receptor autoantibody 
levels were positively associated with betweenness centrality in the right 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and negatively with characteristic path 
length in the right precentral gyrus, based on gray matter network 
analysis from routine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [103]. Neu­
roinflammation and degeneration in the right frontal operculum, 
detected via free-water-corrected diffusion tensor imaging (FW-DTI), 
were linked to levels of autoantibodies and disease duration [30].These 
findings suggest a connection between GPCR autoantibody levels, 
cognitive dysfunction, and pain in ME/CFS. Additionally, Yamamura 
presented next-generation sequencing data showing a skewed B cell 
repertoire, particularly with biased IGHV gene usage in ME/CFS patients 
fulfilling the CCC, Fukuda, and IOM diagnostic criteria [104], and an 
increase in Neuropilin-1+ self-reactive T helper cells in ME/CFS, PCS, 
and other autoimmune disorders [105]. He emphasized the need for 
longitudinal studies, further clinical correlation, and investigation of 
other autoantibodies.
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
6 

Birgit Sawitzki proposed that a subset of ME/CFS patients exhibits 
increased frequencies of activated B and T cells due to dysregulated T-B 
interactions, with the degree and molecular characteristics of this acti­
vation offering potential for treatment stratification and identification of 
therapeutic targets. A critical aspect is distinguishing between 
extrafollicularly-derived short-lived plasmablasts and long-lived plasma 
cells that undergo somatic hypermutation in the germinal center, as this 
enables tracing the cellular origin and molecular pathways involved in 
the development of autoreactive B cells. Sawitzki presented preliminary 
data from a post-COVID ME/CFS cohort (n=20), diagnosed using the 
CCC, with elevated β2-adrenergic receptor autoantibodies that under­
went immunoadsorption as part of a clinical trial at the Charit´e Fatigue 
Center in Berlin, Germany [106]. The study aimed to compare patients 
with healthy controls, patients pre- versus post-treatment, and re­
sponders versus non-responders. In treatment responders, deep immu­
nophenotyping revealed elevated frequencies of strongly activated 
CXCR5high B cells – indicative of germinal center activity – which were 
significantly reduced after treatment in the same patients, suggesting a 
pathological role. In addition, ME/CFS patients showed increased fre­
quencies of activated T follicular helper cells compared to healthy 
controls as well as elevated plasma concentration of markers indicative 
of ongoing follicular T-B cell interactions. These markers were also 
reduced after treatment, supporting a role for dysregulated germinal 
center responses in disease pathology. Ongoing and future studies aim to 
examine B cell receptor (BCR) clonal overlap in activated B cells and 
plasmablasts, identify targeted autoantigens, and characterize the mo­
lecular signals driving pathological T and B cell activation.
Anna C. Aschenbrenner further elaborated on immune cell signa­
tures in post-COVID ME/CFS with preliminary single-cell RNA- 
sequencing data. A total of 40 PCS patients with persistent fatigue and 
exertion intolerance six months after COVID-19 with or without ME/ 
CFS, diagnosed using the CCC, after mild to moderate COVID-19 were 
recruited at the Charit´e Fatigue Center in Berlin, Germany. Analysis of 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) revealed alterations in 
circulating immune cells, especially in the natural killer (NK) cell and 
monocyte compartment, compared to 20 recovered healthy controls. 
These entailed altered gene expression profiles distinguishing post- 
COVID ME/CFS patients from recovered healthy controls including 
changes in compositions of NK and monocyte subpopulations with 
dysregulation of pro-inflammatory markers. First insights into a second 
study on 46 post-infectious ME/CFS patients, including cases with other 
prior infectious triggers than SARS-CoV-2, such as EBV or influenza vi­
ruses, revealed no major differences in the single-cell transcriptome 
profiles between the infection-based clinical groups. In contrast, similar 
alterations in NK cell subpopulation compositions were observed across 
all ME/CFS patients compared to recovered controls, consistent with 
findings from the first cohort. Furthermore, transcriptome profiles 
stratified this patient cohort into two subgroups, one of which appeared 
to have a more pronounced clinical phenotype with a higher PEM score, 
lower Bell score, and a longer disease duration. These findings support 
the use of clinical omics approaches for patient stratification and the 
development of targeted therapeutic strategies in future clinical trials.
5. Treatment of ME/CFS
An overview of all presented clinical trials, including available 
identifiers, study design, and status, can be found in Table 1.
5.1. Clinical trials
Nina Babel provided an overview of the current knowledge on IgG 
therapy in ME/CFS and PCS. She outlined the clinical use of intravenous 
and subcutaneous immunoglobulin (IVIG and SCIG), approved in Ger­
many as substitution therapy for immune deficiencies and as modula­
tory therapy for autoimmune disorders. For the latter, the mechanism of 
action is unresolved but may involve blocking of antigen- or Fc- 
receptors, neutralizing autoantibodies and cytokines, and enhanced 
degradation of autoantibodies via neonatal Fc-receptor saturation. A 
1990 study with 49 ME/CFS patients treated with 3 IVIG infusions of 2 
g/kg bodyweight showed significant physical improvement after 3 
months [107], not replicated in a 1997 follow-up [108]. Another study 
from 1997 in 70 adolescents, showed significant functional improve­
ment after 3 IVIG infusions of 1g/kg of bodyweight [109]. A 2020 study 
using SCIG (0.8 g/kg for 12 months), showed fewer infections, as well as 
improvement of fatigue score and physical activity after 12 months in 
patients who met the CCC [110]. Babel’s own group reported on IVIG (3 
infusions of 0.5 g/kg) in PCS patients with severe symptoms persisting 
longer than three months after COVID-19, showing significant reduction 
in self-reported fatigue and cognitive deficits after 24 weeks with a 
broader therapeutic effect than budesonide or non-pharmacological 
therapy [111]. In conclusion, while IgG therapy shows promise for 
ME/CFS and PCS, optimal dosing, effectiveness, and identification of 
biomarkers for patient stratification require further large-scale studies.
Laura Kim presented results from an ongoing study on hyperbaric 
oxygen therapy (HBOT) at the Charit´e Fatigue Center in Berlin, Germany 
[112]. Patients received 100% oxygen at 2.0 atmosphere absolute (ATA) 
in a pressurized chamber over 40 sessions. HBOT induces an unphy­
siological state of hyperoxia, increasing tissue oxygenation. With 
repeated exposure, this triggers adaptive cellular responses, known as 
the hyperoxia-hypoxia paradox, including activation of hypoxia- 
inducible factors, angiogenesis, and improved mitochondrial function 
and tissue repair [113–115]. The trial included 30 ME/CFS patients 
fulfilling the CCC following viral infections. The treatment was well 
tolerated, with only mild, transient side effects. The primary outcome, 
physical functioning measured by SF-36, showed significant improve­
ment one month after treatment. Additionally, improvements were 
observed in secondary outcomes, including pain (SF-36), fatigue 
(Chalder Fatigue Questionnaire), and neurocognitive function (Symbol 
Digit Modalities Test, SDMT). These findings support HBOT as a 
potentially effective intervention for a subgroup of ME/CFS patients. 
However, questions remain regarding the durability of benefit, and the 
identification of biomarkers to determine which patients are most likely 
to benefit from the treatment.
Alan Cash presented findings on oxaloacetate treatment in ME/CFS 
patients. Oxaloacetate, a key metabolite in the Krebs cycle, is often 
depleted in ME/CFS patients fulfilling Fukuda criteria, as shown by 
metabolomic data from a Cornell University cohort [116]. Preclinical 
research on anhydrous enol-oxaloacetate (AEO) shows it reduces 
chronic inflammation by suppressing NF-κB [117], decreases glycolysis 
and lactate production [118], enhances mitochondrial biogenesis [117], 
and improves cellular glucose uptake and NAD+/NADH redox balance 
[119]. Two clinical trials in ME/CFS patients who met Fukuda criteria 
revealed that oxaloacetate is well tolerated and significantly reduces 
fatigue, with an average improvement of 33.3% in the first trial (n=76) 
[120,121] and 25–35% in the second trial (n=82) [122,123]. Notably, 
40.5% of patients were classified as “enhanced responders”, reporting an 
average fatigue reduction of 63%. Cognitive function, measured by 
Simple Reaction Time, also improved significantly compared to controls 
[120,122]. These findings suggest that oxaloacetate may offer a prom­
ising therapeutic approach for physical and mental fatigue symptoms in 
ME/CFS.
David M. Systrom presented the study protocol for the Life 
Improvement Trial (LIFT), a randomized controlled trial on the thera­
peutic potential of low-dose naltrexone (LDN) and pyridostigmine 
(Mestinon) in 160 patients with ME/CFS diagnosed using the CCC, 
recruited at the Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, and through Open Medicine Foundation’s StudyME registry 
[124,125]. LDN, a μ-opioid receptor antagonist, downregulates proin­
flammatory signaling via toll-like receptor 4 inhibition, reducing cyto­
kines such as TNF-α and IL-6, when administered at subtherapeutic 
doses (0.5-4.5 mg) [126]. Previous studies in fibromyalgia showed a 
65% improvement in pain [127], and a Finnish ME/CFS chart review 
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
7 

Table 1 
Overview of presented clinical studies or trials with presenter, title, intervention/treatment, study design, and status listed.
Presenter
Clinical Study/ 
Trial
(Short) Title
Intervention/ 
Treatment
Study Design
Status
Ref.
Nina Babel
Lloyd et al., 1990
A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 
intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in patients 
with chronic fatigue syndrome
Intravenous 
immunoglobulin
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Completed
[107]
Nina Babel
Vollmer-Conna 
et al., 1997
Intravenous immunoglobulin is ineffective in the 
treatment of patients with chronic fatigue 
syndrome
Intravenous 
immunoglobulin
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Completed
[108]
Nina Babel
Rowe et al., 1997
Double-blind randomized controlled trial to assess 
the efficacy of intravenous gammaglobulin for the 
management of chronic fatigue syndrome in 
adolescents
Intravenous 
immunoglobulin
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Completed
[109]
Nina Babel
Scheibenbogen 
et al., 2021
Tolerability and Efficacy of s.c. IgG Self-Treatment 
in ME/CFS Patients with IgG/IgG Subclass 
Deficiency: A Proof-of-Concept Study
Subcutaneous 
immunoglobulin
Interventional, open-label 
proof-of-concept trial
Completed
[110]
Nina Babel
Hogeweg et al., 
2023
Intravenous immunoglobulins in the treatment of 
post-COVID: A case–control study
Intravenous 
immunoglobulin
Observational 
case-control study
Completed
[111]
Laura Kim
NCT06118138, 
2023
Hyperbaric High Pressure Oxygen Therapy in 
Post-COVID Syndrome and ME/CFS
Hyperbaric oxygen 
therapy (HBOT)
Observational study
Ongoing, 
recruitment 
ended
[112]
Alan Cash
NCT04592354, 
2020 
Cash et al., 2022
Anhydrous Enol-Oxaloacetate (AEO) on 
Improving Fatigue in Post-COVID-19 Survivors 
(AEO)
Oxaloacetate
Interventional, open-label, 
non-randomized, dose- 
escalation proof-of-concept 
trial
Completed
[120,121]
Alan Cash
NCT05273372, 
2022 
Cash et al., 2024
RESTORE ME - RCT of Oxaloacetate on Improving 
Fatigue in ME/CFS
Oxaloacetat
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Completed
[122,123]
David M. 
Systrom
NCT06366724, 
2024 
Meadows et al., 
2024
LIFT: Life Improvement Trial (LIFT)
Pyridostigmine/Low- 
Dose Naltrexone
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase II trial
Recruiting
[124,125]
David 
Putrino
NCT06960928, 
2025
Low Dose Sirolimus in People With Post-Acute 
Sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) Long COVID-19
Low-dose Sirolimus
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase III trial
Recruiting
[131]
Michael J. 
Peluso
Peluso et al., 2022
Effect of Oral Nirmatrelvir on Long COVID 
Symptoms: 4 Cases and Rationale for Systematic 
Studies
Nirmatrelvir
Observational case series
Completed
[136]
Michael J. 
Peluso
NCT05668091, 
2022 
Sawano et al., 
2025
A Decentralized, Randomized Phase 2 Efficacy and 
Safety Study of Nirmatrelvir/Ritonavir in Adults 
with Long COVID
Nirmatrelvir/ 
Ritonavir
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase II trial
Completed
[137,138]
Michael J. 
Peluso
Scheppke et al., 
2024
Remission of severe forms of long COVID 
following monoclonal antibody (MCA) infusions: 
A report of signal index cases and call for targeted 
research
Casirivimab/ 
Imdevimab
Observational case report
Completed
[139]
Michael J. 
Peluso
NCT05576662, 
2022 
Geng et al., 2024
Paxlovid for Treatment of Long Covid (STOP- 
PASC)
Nirmatrelvir/ 
Ritonavir
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase II trial
Completed
[140,141]
Clinical trials targeting autoantibodies
Olav Mella
Fluge et al., 2009
Clinical impact of B-cell depletion with the anti- 
CD20 antibody rituximab in chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a preliminary case series.
Rituximab
Observational case series
Completed
[142]
Olav Mella
NCT00848692, 
2008 
Fluge et al. 2011
B-Lymphocyte Depletion in Myalgic 
Encephalopathy/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Rituximab
Interventional, open-label 
phase II trial
Completed
[143,144]
Olav Mella
NCT01156909, 
2010 
Fluge et al., 2015
B-cell Depletion Using the Monoclonal Anti-CD20 
Antibody Rituximab in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Rituximab
Interventional, open-label 
phase II trial
Completed
[145,146]
Olav Mella
NCT02229942, 
2014 
Fluge et al., 2019
B-lymphocyte Depletion Using Rituximab in 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic 
Encephalopathy (CFS/ME). A Randomized Phase- 
III Study (RituxME)
Rituximab
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase III trial
Completed
[147,148]
Olav Mella
NCT02444091, 
2015 
Rekeland et al., 
2020 
Rekeland et al., 
2024
Cyclophosphamide in Myalgic Encephalopathy/ 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) (CycloME)
Cyclophosphamide
Interventional, open-label 
phase II trial
Completed
[149–151]
Øystein 
Fluge
EudraCT 
2022-000281-18, 
2022 
Fluge et al., 2025
Treatment with daratumumab injections in 
moderate to severe ME/CFS
Daratumumab
Interventional, open-label 
phase II trial
Completed
[153,154]
(continued on next page)
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
8 

reported a 73.9% positive self-reported response, especially in cognitive 
vigilance [128]. Mestinon, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that en­
hances cholinergic signaling at synapses [129,130], will be evaluated for 
its effect on autonomic dysfunction. The study incorporates non- 
invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing (Shape Test) to assess phys­
iological and functional outcomes. Dosing strategies and combination 
therapy (LDN + Mestinon) were explored. Preliminary findings indicate 
synergistic benefits in symptom relief and functional capacity, sup­
porting the clinical use of combined LDN and Mestinon treatment in 
ME/CFS and PCS.
David Putrino’s presentation outlined a clinical trial that will 
investigate low-dose rapamycin for Long COVID treatment at the Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York, USA [131], targeting 
key pathophysiological features including latent viral reactivation (EBV, 
Human Herpesvirus (HHV) 1-6, Cytomegalovirus (CMV), etc.), immune 
dysregulation (T cell exhaustion, B cell dysregulation), and chronic 
inflammation (altered interferon expression) [19]. Preclinical and clin­
ical evidence from other populations suggest that low-dose rapamycin 
can reverse immunosenescence and enhance T cell function [132], sta­
bilize inflammatory cytokine secretion [133], and reduce infection 
rates. In the ongoing double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial 
80 participants with physician-diagnosed Long COVID and at least six 
months of persisting symptoms after SARS-CoV-2 infection, including 
moderate fatigue and PEM, were randomized 1:1 to receive rapamycin 
(escalating doses: 1mg, 2mg, 4mg) or placebo. Deep immunopheno­
typing will be performed at baseline, midpoint, intervention end and 
post-interventional follow-up. The study aims to identify responders and 
associated biomarkers, guiding future larger-scale and combination 
therapy studies.
Michael J. Peluso presented an overview of current findings and 
open questions regarding viral persistence and its treatment in PCS. He 
reviewed evidence of long-term SARS-CoV-2 RNA and antigen detection 
in various tissues, such as gut, brain, blood, and stool, up to 24 months 
post-infection, using data from multiple studies across different plat­
forms [18,134,135]. Peluso emphasized that viral persistence was 
clearly observed in the early phase of the pandemic, when population 
immunity was low and infections were often more severe. However, its 
current role remains uncertain, and it is not yet clear whether viral 
persistence is a cause or a consequence of PCS. The presentation 
addressed both the challenges and potential of targeting viral persis­
tence therapeutically. Case reports and early trials using antivirals (e.g. 
nirmatrelvir-ritonavir) and monoclonal antibodies show mixed results, 
with some improvements in individual cases but no consistent benefit in 
controlled studies [136–141]. Limitations include short treatment 
duration, insufficient tissue penetration, and lack of validated viral 
persistence. Peluso stressed the need for dedicated biomarker develop­
ment and scalable diagnostics and called for coordinated, cross- 
institutional efforts to investigate persistent viral reservoirs and their 
therapeutic relevance.
5.2. Clinical trials targeting autoantibodies
Olav Mella presented early findings from the Haukeland University 
Hospital in Bergen, Norway, showing that some cancer patients with 
comorbid ME/CFS experienced symptom improvement after chemo­
therapy, particularly with cyclophosphamide and rituximab. This led to 
trials exploring ME/CFS immunopathogenesis and the therapeutic po­
tential of immune-modulating agents. Early studies on rituximab, a 
CD20+ B cell-depleting monoclonal antibody, including a 2009 case 
series and two phase II trials (2011, 2015), showed benefits in a subset of 
ME/CFS patients diagnosed based on Fukuda criteria [142–146]. 
However, the subsequent phase III RituxME trial, involving 151 patients 
who met the CCC, failed to demonstrate significant differences between 
rituximab and placebo [147,148]. Potential explanations included sub­
optimal endpoints, insufficient dosing, or low efficacy in unselected 
cohorts. Meanwhile, a phase II cyclophosphamide trial in 40 moderate- 
to-severe ME/CFS patients fulfilling the CCC reported a 55% response 
rate after six infusions over 23 weeks [149,150]. Short-term toxicity was 
notable, long-term side effects were limited, with durable responses at 6- 
year follow-up in many responders [151]. Clinical improvements across 
symptoms support an underlying immunopathogenic mechanism 
involving dysfunctional autoantibodies affecting circulatory, neurolog­
ical, and gastrointestinal function. Rituximab responses appeared 4-9 
months post-treatment, while cyclophosphamide responses were more 
variable (2-8 months) and acute [147,149]. Persistent and recurring 
symptoms may relate to long-lived plasma cells producing pathological 
autoantibodies, residing in immune-privileged niches and evading CD20 
depletion [152]. Overall, those findings emphasize immune dysregula­
tion as a central component of ME/CFS, with therapeutic success reliant 
on precise targeting of immune components. This experience has led to 
current plasma cell depleting trials.
Øystein Fluge presented a pilot study investigating daratumumab 
treatment, a CD38-targeting monoclonal antibody, in ME/CFS patients 
diagnosed based on the CCC and recruited at the Haukeland University 
Hospital in Bergen, Norway [153,154]. Based on prior findings impli­
cating the involvement of functional autoantibodies in ME/CFS and 
inconclusive results from B cell-depletion therapy with rituximab, this 
study targeted plasma cells to reduce immunoglobulins and persistent 
pathogenic autoantibodies. Ten female patients with moderate to severe 
ME/CFS and a mean disease duration of 12 years (range 3-35 years) 
participated. The primary aim was to assess feasibility and tolerability. 
Secondary endpoints included immunological parameters and clinical 
measures like physical function and fatigue. Daratumumab was well 
tolerated with only mild adverse events. Clinical improvement occurred 
in 60% of patients, lasting up to 24 months to date in five cases. Re­
sponders showed increased physical activity, a mean 56% IgG reduction, 
and higher baseline NK cell counts. This suggests that antibody- 
dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), a mechanism by which NK 
cells eliminate antibody-coated target cells via Fc receptor interaction, 
might contribute to the therapeutic effects. Non-responders (40%) 
showed no significant changes in symptoms or biomarkers. The results 
Table 1 (continued)
Presenter 
Clinical Study/ 
Trial 
(Short) Title 
Intervention/ 
Treatment 
Study Design 
Status 
Ref.
Øystein 
Fluge
EUCT 
2024-520094-13- 
00, 2025
Plasma cell targeting in ME/CFS
Daratumumab
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase II trial
Recruiting
[155]
Wakiro 
Sato
NCT06952413, 
2025
Study of the Efficacy and Safety for Rituximab in 
Myalgia Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Rituximab
Interventional, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo- 
controlled phase II trial
Recruiting
[156]
Elisa Stein
Stein et al., 2025
Efficacy of repeated immunoadsorption in patients 
with post-COVID myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
chronic fatigue syndrome and elevated β2- 
adrenergic receptor autoantibodies: a prospective 
cohort study
IgG depletion via 
Immunoadsorption
Observational study
Completed
[106]
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
9 

support the assumption that functional autoantibodies contribute to 
ME/CFS pathophysiology and suggest that a subset of patients could 
benefit from plasma cell depletion. A randomized, double-blind, pla­
cebo-controlled phase II trial (KTS11) is currently being prepared to 
validate these findings [155].
Wakiro Sato presented a recently initiated exploratory placebo- 
controlled, double-blind, phase II study to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of rituximab in ME/CFS at the National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry in Tokyo, Japan [156]. The study includes 30 ME/CFS pa­
tients aged 18-65 years with moderate to severe functional impairment 
(Performance Status (PS) [157] of 4 or higher), diagnosed according to 
the CCC. Subjects are randomized into rituximab-first and placebo-first 
groups, receiving rituximab at 375 mg/m2/week intravenously for 4 
weeks, with primary evaluation at 24 weeks and secondary evaluation at 
48 weeks. Primary endpoint is the proportion of patients with a PS 
improvement of at least one point at 24 weeks, adjusted for baseline 
severity, prior infectious-episode onset, and anti-β2-adrenergic receptor 
antibody status. Secondary endpoints include detailed clinical evalua­
tions (e.g., supine time, activities, fatigue, sleep quality) and biomarkers 
(e.g., gut microbiome, brain imaging, immune profiling, metabolomics). 
Sato highlights the potential role of B cell dysregulation and autoanti­
bodies in ME/CFS pathophysiology and aims to identify biomarkers 
predictive of treatment response to rituximab.
Judith Bellmann-Strobl presented the setup for the PIONEER B cell 
depletion trial in patients with post-infectious autoimmune ME/CFS at 
the Charit´e in Berlin, Germany. The trial will investigate the efficacy of 
inebilizumab (anti-CD19 monoclonal antibody) compared to ocrelizu­
mab or ublituximab (anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody), following pre- 
treatment with immunoadsorption. A total of 55 participants fulfilling 
the CCC will be randomized into three treatment groups: placebo 
(n=25), anti-CD20 (n=15), and anti-CD19 (n=15) treatment. Key in­
clusion criteria comprise infection-triggered disease onset, a functional 
disability Bell score of 30–60, the presence of autoantibodies directed 
against β2-adrenergic receptor or neuronal antigens, and evidence of a 
clinical response to pre-treatment with immunoadsorption. Monoclonal 
antibodies are administered intravenously in three doses – an initial 
infusion, a second dose after 2 weeks, and a third at 6 months – in 
accordance with their use in routine clinical practice. Bellmann-Strobl 
presented preliminary data from two patients who received B cell 
depleting therapy with inebilizumab following a clinical response to 
immunoadsorption [106], both of whom demonstrated notable symp­
tom improvement. These findings support the pathophysiological rele­
vance of B cells in ME/CFS and PCS, at least in a subset of patients, and 
provide a strong rationale for further exploration of CD19- and CD20- 
targeted immunotherapy in post-infectious ME/CFS.
Elisa Stein presented an observational study conducted at the 
Charit´e Fatigue Center in Berlin, Germany, which investigated the effi­
cacy of repeated immunoadsorption in post-COVID ME/CFS patients 
with elevated levels of β2-adrenergic receptor autoantibodies [106]. A 
total of 20 patients fulfilling the CCC (median age 40 years, median 
illness duration 22 months) underwent five sessions of immu­
noadsorption within 10 days, with a second treatment cycle offered 
upon symptom relapse. Primary endpoint was defined as a ≥10-point 
improvement in physical functioning score as assessed by the SF-36 at 4 
weeks post-intervention. By day 5, significant reductions in serum im­
munoglobulins (IgG -79%, IgA -68%, IgM -76%) and autoantibody titers 
were observed. Clinical responses varied with a subset of 14 patients 
demonstrating rapid improvements in SF-36 physical functioning score 
and related symptoms, while six others did not respond. A repeated cycle 
in ten responders conferred no additional benefit. Findings from this 
study are consistent with previous studies suggesting that immu­
noadsorption may offer therapeutic potential for patients with autoim­
mune profiles. However, variable responses highlight the need for 
markers to predict treatment efficacy, and the limited durability un­
derscores the need for maintenance therapy. Studies on deep B cell 
subtyping and markers of immune dysregulation are ongoing. 
Sequential therapies combining immunoadsorption with subsequent 
depletion of autoantibody-producing B cells are in preparation.
Georg Schlieper reported clinical observations on immu­
noadsorption in severely affected ME/CFS patients, particularly after 
SARS-CoV-2 infection or vaccination, treated at Dialysis Hannover – 
Center for Kidney, Hypertension and Metabolic Diseases in Hannover, 
Germany. Several case reports and a patient series (n=24) were pre­
sented. Across all case reports immunoadsorption led to improvements 
in fatigue, PEM and cognitive symptoms such as brain fog. Some patients 
progressed from bedridden to walking or returning to daily activities. In 
some patients, improvements began already after 3–5 immu­
noadsorption sessions, in others a few weeks after treatment, with 
benefits lasting for several months in the majority of patients. However, 
responses varied, and not all patients improved (response rate 70-75%). 
For analysis of the patient series, individuals were stratified by baseline 
Bell scores (15–30 vs. 40–70), with both subgroups improving in fatigue 
severity and health questionnaires, especially in the more severely 
affected group (Bell score 15-30). No severe adverse effects were re­
ported. This case series suggests immunoadsorption may offer thera­
peutic benefit in ME/CFS patients with autoimmune features. However, 
the uncontrolled nature of the study and the absence of a placebo group 
underscores the need for randomized controlled trials to validate effi­
cacy and identify predictors of response.
6. Research in progress – highlights from selected poster 
presentations by early-career scientists
This section highlights selected poster presentations by early-career 
scientists, curated by Martina Seifert and Wolfram Doehner, show­
casing ongoing research projects presented during the conference.
Guido Camm`a presented data on structural and functional brain 
alterations in ME/CFS patients identified via MRI before and after hy­
perbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) as part of a clinical trial at the Charit´e 
Fatigue Center in Berlin, Germany [112]. The study included 30 ME/CFS 
patients fulfilling the CCC and 30 matched controls who underwent 40 
sessions of 100% oxygen treatment in hyperbaric chambers, intended to 
enhance microcirculation, mitochondrial function, and reduce neuro­
inflammation. Pre-HBOT, ME/CFS patients showed increased thalamic 
functional connectivity with motor, somatosensory, and visual regions, 
suggesting altered sensory and motor processing. After HBOT, thalamic 
functional connectivity normalized. The absence of volumetric changes 
indicates that ME/CFS symptoms are more closely associated with 
functional network changes than with structural abnormalities.
Wiebke L¨ohden investigated gut microbial alterations in 106 ME/ 
CFS patients who met the CCC compared to 91 matched healthy controls 
using metabolic modeling of stool metagenomic data. Participants were 
recruited at five geographically-diverse ME/CFS clinics across the USA 
[158]. ME/CFS patients had decreased α-diversity and amino acid 
auxotrophy abundances, suggestive of an altered gut microbiome 
composition. An increased production of the tryptophan metabolites 
tryptamine, indole-3-acetic-acid, and indole-3-lactic acid with a poten­
tial influence on the gut-brain-axis was observed. Moreover, a reduced 
bacteria-mediated production of the anti-inflammatory indole-3-propi­
onic-acid was reported. Therefore, L¨ohden concluded that the altered 
gut microbial metabolism in ME/CFS might be in favor of pro- 
inflammatory reactions.
Lorenz L. Mihatsch assessed the feasibility, disease severity corre­
lations, and predictive value of hand grip strength (HGS) for diagnosis of 
ME/CFS in children, adolescents, and young adults, using an established 
protocol with an electric dynamometer [51]. For this, 83 ME/CFS pa­
tients fulfilling the CCC aged 10-25 years were recruited at the Munich 
Chronic Fatigue Center for Young People (MCFC) in Munich, Germany. 
The study demonstrated a significant reduction in muscular strength in 
ME/CFS patients compared to 82 healthy controls, but not specific to 
ME/CFS when compared to 63 disease controls who presented to the 
MCFC for probable post-viral or post-vaccination fatigue. Despite 
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
10 

fatigue and PEM, HGS testing was feasible in all patients and had a 
predictive diagnostic value of 50-56%. Both maximum and mean HGS 
showed significant correlations with markers of disease severity. These 
findings show that HGS testing is a promising additional diagnostic tool 
for ME/CFS in children and adolescents.
Christian Puta presented data from Anuradha Ramoji investi­
gating the differentiation of ME/CFS through Raman spectroscopic 
profiling of PBMCs from 18 ME/CFS patients experiencing PEM and 16 
healthy controls recruited at the Interdisciplinary Center for Post- 
Infectious Long-Term Consequences (ICPL, University Hospital Jena, 
Germany). Samples were collected immediately before and 24 hours 
after a one-minute sit-to-stand-test. A Raman-based principal compo­
nent and linear discriminant analysis (PCA-LDA) model and difference- 
Raman spectra revealed significant alterations of protein and lipid 
content in PBMCs of ME/CFS patients post-exertion, demonstrating the 
profound impact of minimal physical activity on the immune system. 
Furthermore, the PCA-LDA model enabled successful discrimination 
between pre- and post-exertion samples in ME/CFS patients, but not in 
healthy controls, with approximately 70% accuracy. Notably, the anal­
ysis revealed two distinct patient subgroups based on divergent immune 
cell profiles, highlighting the clinical heterogeneity of ME/CFS.
Anouk Slaghekke investigated microvascular dysfunction and 
basement membrane thickening in skeletal muscle in ME/CFS patients 
fulfilling the CCC and PCS patients diagnosed by experienced physi­
cians, recruited at Amsterdam Medical Center (AMC), the Netherlands. 
For this, skeletal muscle oxygenation during maximal exercise was 
assessed, and microvasculature structure and function in muscle bi­
opsies from the vastus lateralis were analyzed histologically and by 
electron microscopy. Both patient groups (ME/CFS n=26; PCS n=24) 
exhibited decreased oxygen uptake and vasodilatory capacity compared 
to 30 healthy controls, while only ME/CFS patients showed additional 
lower capillarization. Moreover, patients had increased Collagen IV 
deposition in the capillary basement membrane, characterized through 
a thicker basement membrane and reduced lumen space. Further, pa­
tients exhibited microvascular ultrastructural abnormalities including 
endothelial activation and dysfunction, abundance of vacuoles and signs 
of endothelial cell degeneration. These pathological alterations likely 
result in insufficient oxygen and nutrient supply alongside impaired 
waste product clearance.
Timon Kuchler presented insights from the All Eyes on PCS study at 
the University Hospital of the Technical University Munich, Germany, 
analyzing dynamic and static retinal vessel parameters in 102 PCS pa­
tients, experiencing persisting symptoms for at least two months after 
SARS-CoV-2 infection, compared to 96 SARS-CoV-2-infection-naive as 
well as 102 SARS-CoV-2-infection-recovered healthy controls [159]. 
Patients showed significantly reduced venular flicker-induced dilation 
(vFID), narrower retinal arterioles and reduced arterio-venous-ratio 
(AVR). These findings indicate persistent alterations in retinal micro­
circulation among PCS patients. Correlation analysis revealed associa­
tions between both vFID and AVR with clinical severity scores, 
suggesting that ongoing endothelial dysfunction contributes to symptom 
burden. Within the PCS cohort, patients meeting the CCC for diagnosis 
of ME/CFS (n=63) exhibited more severe microvascular impairment 
compared to those without ME/CFS. These findings support the diag­
nostic potential of retinal vessel analysis.
7. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, the conference provided a comprehensive overview of 
state-of-the-art research on ME/CFS, covering recent advances in patient 
care and mechanistic insights into cardiovascular dysregulation, meta­
bolic dysfunction, and immune dysregulation. Clinical trials targeting 
these pathophysiological pathways were presented, underlining the 
field’s ongoing efforts to translate foundational research into targeted 
therapies.
Future challenges in ME/CFS research remain substantial. Key 
priorities include the identification of reliable biomarkers for diagnosis, 
a better understanding and resolution of disease heterogeneity, and the 
translation of preclinical findings into well-designed clinical studies to 
identify effective treatment options. In addition, systemic challenges 
such as stigma and persistent underfunding continue to hinder progress. 
Addressing these issues will require improved physician education as 
well as sustained and coordinated research funding. A promising 
example for the latter is the National Decade for Post-Infectious Dis­
eases, a long-term research program launched by the German Federal 
Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) to strengthen and 
coordinate research, infrastructure, and clinical translation for diseases 
that can occur after infections, such as ME/CFS and PCS, over a ten-year 
period. Addressing these scientific and systemic challenges will be 
critical to advancing the field and ultimately improving diagnosis and 
treatment for those affected by ME/CFS and related post-infectious 
diseases.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
writing process
During the preparation of this work, the authors did not use gener­
ative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process, which go 
beyond improving readability and language.
Funding
Anna C. Aschenbrenner is a member of the Excellence Cluster 
ImmunoSensation (EXC 2151) funded by the German Research Foun­
dation (DFG) under grant agreement 390873048, is supported by the 
DFG (grant numbers 466168337 and 466168626), the EU-funded proj­
ect NEUROCOV receiving funding from the RIA HORIZON Research and 
Innovation (grant number 101057775), and the German Federal Min­
istry of Education and Research (BMBF) funded project IMMME 
(01EJ2204D).
Uta Behrends received funding from the ME/CFS Research Founda­
tion, the Weidenhammer Zoebele Foundation, the Lost Voices Founda­
tion, Fatigatio e.V., the German Federal Ministries of Education and 
Research (BMBF) and Health (BMG), and the Bavarian State Ministries 
of Science and the Arts (StMWK) and Health and Care (StMGP) as well as 
private donations; she received lecture honoraria in the context of PCS 
and ME/CFS from medical societies and professional associations.
Judith Bellmann-Strobl received institutional research support from 
the German Federal Ministry of Health (BMG), the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), NEMOS e.V., Merck, Ho­
rizon, Alexion and Bayer AG and a scholarship award from Stiftung 
Charit´e (Clinical Fellow Program).
Jeroen den Dunnen receives funding from ZonMw (grant numbers 
10430142210001, 10091012110012, 10430172310009, 1108002241 
0010, 11080012310002, 11080022410020) and Stichting Long-COVID.
Christiana Franke receives funding from the German Research 
Foundation (DFG), the German Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF), and the German Federal Ministry of Health (BMG).
Øystein Fluge and Olav Mella, as supervisors of the ME Research 
Group at Haukeland University Hospital, receive funding from the 
Norwegian ME Association, Sara Emilie Tandberg (Careless AS), MENiN, 
Fokus på ME, and the Legacy of Torstein Hereid.
Wiebke L¨ohden receives funding from the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (BMBF) and the German Aerospace Center 
(DLR).
The study presented by Lorenz L. Mihatsch was funded by the Wei­
denhammer Zoebele Foundation, the Bavarian State Ministry of Science 
and the Arts (StMWK), and the Bavarian State Ministry of Health and 
Care (StMGP). The funding was granted to Uta Behrends.
Christian Puta receives funding from the German Federal Ministry of 
Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) and from the German Federal 
Ministry of Health (BMG).
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
11 

David Putrino receives funding from the Steven & Alexandra Cohen 
Foundation and the PolyBio Research Foundation.
Anuradha Ramoji receives funding form the Deutsche Gesellschaft 
für ME/CFS and the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology 
and Space (BMFTR) for the projects BioSig-PEM (grant number 
01EJ2408B) and SARS-CoV-2Dx (grant number 13N15745).
Wakiro Sato receives funding from Zenyaku Kogyo Co., Ltd.
Birgit Sawitzki receives funding from the German Research Foun­
dation (DFG) and the German Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF).
Carmen Scheibenbogen receives funding from the ME/CFS Research 
Foundation, the Weidenhammer Zoebele Foundation, the Lost Voices 
Foundation, Fatigatio e.V., the German Research Foundation (DFG), the 
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), and the 
German Federal Ministry of Health (BMG).
The study by Anouk Slaghekke was supported by the Patient-Led 
Research Collaborative for Long COVID, the AMC and VU University 
Medical Center Foundations, the ZonMw Onderzoeksprogramma for 
ME/CVS and post-COVID, the Solve ME 2022 Ramsay Grant Program, 
ME Research UK, and Stichting Long COVID Nederland. The funding was 
granted to Rob C. I. Wüst.
Franziska Sotzny receives funding from the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (BMBF).
Juergen M. Steinacker receives funding from the German Federal 
Ministry of Health (BMG) and has received funding from the Baden- 
Württemberg Ministry of Social Affairs, Health and Integration and the 
Baden-Württemberg Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts.
Karl J. Tronstad receives funding from the Research Council of 
Norway, the Western Norway Regional Health Authority (Helse Vest), 
the University of Bergen, and the Norwegian ME Association.
Klaus Wirth is managing director of Mitodicure GmbH, whose drug 
project for ME/CFS is co-funded by the European Union and the German 
State of Hessen.
Rob C. I. Wüst receives funding from the Patient-Led Research 
Collaborative for Long COVID, the AMC and VU University Medical 
Center Foundations, ZonMw Onderzoeksprogramma for ME/CVS and 
post-COVID, the Solve ME 2022 Ramsay Grant Program, ME Research 
UK and Stichting Long COVID Nederland.
The funders are not responsible for the content.
Declaration of competing interest
Alan Cash is an executive in the pharmaceutical company Terra 
Biological LLC developing oxaloacetate for the treatment of ME/CFS.
Wolfram Doehner received personal fees from Aimediq, Astra 
Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Scientific, Cardiomatics, 
Medtronic, Vifor Pharma, travel support from Pharmacosmos.
Haukeland University Hospital, through its Technology Transfer 
Office, holds a pending patent application related to plasma cell- 
targeting for treatments of ME/CFS (WO2021038097A1). Øystein 
Fluge and Olav Mella are listed as inventors on these applications.
Michael J. Peluso has received consulting fees from Gilead Sciences, 
AstraZeneca, BioVie, Apellis Pharmaceuticals, and BioNTech, travel 
support from Invivyd, and research support from Aerium Therapeutics 
and Shionogi, outside the submitted work.
Carmen Scheibenbogen has a consulting agreement with CellTrend 
and Berlin Cures. Charit´e holds, together with CellTrend, a patent for the 
diagnostic use of autoantibodies against β2 adrenergic receptor 
antibodies.
Klaus Wirth is Managing Director of Mitodicure GmbH that develops 
a drug for the treatment of ME/CFS.
The remaining authors declare no known competing interests.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the team of the ME/CFS Research Foundation 
for organizing and funding the conference as well as the German 
Research Foundation (DFG), CellTrend, and Miltenyi Biotec for funding. 
Moreover, we thank the Weidenhammer-Zoebele Foundation and the 
Lost Voices Foundation for their continuous support.
AF, LW, SSc and SSt prepared the initial draft of the manuscript. All 
other authors contributed substantially to the scientific content during 
the conference through presentations and discussions of their research, 
which is reflected in this report. All authors critically revised the 
manuscript and approved the final version for submission.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] Lim E-J, Ahn Y-C, Jang E-S, Lee S-W, Lee S-H, Son C-G. Systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the prevalence of chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME). J Transl Med 2020;18(1):100. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0.
[2] Nacul LC, Lacerda EM, Pheby D, Campion P, Molokhia M, Fayyaz S, et al. 
Prevalence of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) in 
three regions of England: a repeated cross-sectional study in primary care. BMC 
Med 2011;9(1):91. https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-9-91.
[3] Vernon SD, Zheng T, Do H, Marconi VC, Jason LA, Singer NG, et al. Incidence and 
prevalence of post-COVID-19 Myalgic encephalomyelitis: a report from the 
observational RECOVER-adult study. J Gen Intern Med 2025;40(5):1085–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-024-09290-9.
[4] Pheby DFH, Araja D, Berkis U, Brenna E, Cullinan J, de Korwin J-D, et al. 
A literature review of GP knowledge and understanding of ME/CFS: a report from 
the Socioeconomic Working Group of the European Network on ME/CFS 
(EUROMENE). Medicina 2021;57(1):7.
[5] Froehlich L, Hattesohl DBR, Jason LA, Scheibenbogen C, Behrends U, Thoma M. 
Medical care situation of people with Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome in Germany. Medicina (Kaunas) 2021;57(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
medicina57070646.
[6] Nacul L, Authier FJ, Scheibenbogen C, Lorusso L, Helland IB, Martin JA, et al. 
European network on Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(EUROMENE): expert consensus on the diagnosis, service provision, and care of 
people with ME/CFS in Europe. Medicina (Kaunas) 2021;57(5). https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/medicina57050510.
[7] Peter RS, Nieters A, G¨opel S, Merle U, Steinacker JM, Deibert P, et al. Persistent 
symptoms and clinical findings in adults with post-acute sequelae of COVID-19/ 
post-COVID-19 syndrome in the second year after acute infection: a population- 
based, nested case-control study. PLoS Med 2025;22(1):e1004511. https://doi. 
org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004511.
[8] Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome, Board on the Health of Select Populations, and Institute of 
Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: 
redefining an illness. In: The National Academies Collection: Reports funded by 
National Institutes of Health. National Academies Press (US); 2015. https://doi. 
org/10.17226/19012.
[9] Choutka J, Jansari V, Hornig M, Iwasaki A. Unexplained post-acute infection 
syndromes. Nat Med 2022;28(5):911–23. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022- 
01810-6.
[10] Steiner S, Fehrer A, Hoheisel F, Schoening S, Aschenbrenner A, Babel N, et al. 
Understanding, diagnosing, and treating Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome - state of the art: report of the 2nd international meeting at the 
Charit´e Fatigue Center. Autoimmun Rev 2023;22(11):103452. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.autrev.2023.103452.
[11] Tabacof L, Kellner C, Breyman E, Dewil S, Braren S, Nasr L, et al. Remote patient 
monitoring for home management of coronavirus disease 2019 in New York: a 
cross-sectional observational study. Telemed J E Health 2021;27(6):641–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2020.0339.
[12] Tabacof L, Tosto-Mancuso J, Wood J, Cortes M, Kontorovich A, McCarthy D, et al. 
Post-acute COVID-19 syndrome negatively impacts health and wellbeing despite 
less severe acute infection. medRxiv 2020. https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2020.11.04.20226126. p. 2020.11.04.20226126.
[13] Davis HE, Assaf GS, McCorkell L, Wei H, Low RJ, Re'em Y, et al. Characterizing 
long COVID in an international cohort: 7 months of symptoms and their impact. 
eClinicalMedicine 2021;38:101019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eclinm.2021.101019.
[14] Davis HE, McCorkell L, Vogel JM, Topol EJ. Long COVID: major findings, 
mechanisms and recommendations. Nat Rev Microbiol 2023;21(3):133–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00846-2.
[15] Kruger A, Joffe D, Lloyd-Jones G, Khan MA, ˇSalamon ˇS, Laubscher GJ, et al. 
Vascular pathogenesis in acute and long COVID: current insights and therapeutic 
outlook. Semin Thromb Hemost 2024;51(3):256–71. https://doi.org/10.1055/s- 
0044-1790603.
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
12 

[16] Fern´andez-Casta˜neda A, Lu P, Geraghty AC, Song E, Lee M-H, Wood J, et al. Mild 
respiratory COVID can cause multi-lineage neural cell and myelin dysregulation. 
Cell 2022;185(14):2452–68. e16, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.008.
[17] Guedes Santos, de Sa K, Silva J, Bayarri-Olmos R, Brinda R, Alec Rath 
Constable R, et al. A causal link between autoantibodies and neurological 
symptoms in long COVID. medRxiv 2024. https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2024.06.18.24309100.
[18] Proal AD, VanElzakker MB, Aleman S, Bach K, Boribong BP, Buggert M, et al. 
SARS-CoV-2 reservoir in post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC). Nat Immunol 
2023;24(10):1616–27. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-023-01601-2.
[19] Klein J, Wood J, Jaycox JR, Dhodapkar RM, Lu P, Gehlhausen JR, et al. 
Distinguishing features of long COVID identified through immune profiling. 
Nature 2023;623(7985):139–48. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06651-y.
[20] Naderi M, Mohieddin N, Mahboob KJ, Vida P, Arezoo E, Aynaz K, et al. The 
reactivation of the various types of viruses following COVID-19 infection: a 
systematic review. Future Virol 2025;20(3-4):99–111. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17460794.2025.2483122.
[21] Appelman B, Charlton BT, Goulding RP, Kerkhoff TJ, Breedveld EA, Noort W, 
et al. Muscle abnormalities worsen after post-exertional malaise in long COVID. 
Nat Commun 2024;15(1):17. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44432-3.
[22] Thaweethai T, Jolley SE, Karlson EW, Levitan EB, Levy B, McComsey GA, et al. 
Development of a definition of postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection. 
JAMA 2023;329(22):1934–46. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.8823.
[23] Kedor C, Freitag H, Meyer-Arndt L, Wittke K, Hanitsch LG, Zoller T, et al. 
A prospective observational study of post-COVID-19 chronic fatigue syndrome 
following the first pandemic wave in Germany and biomarkers associated with 
symptom severity. Nat Commun 2022;13(1):5104. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41467-022-32507-6.
[24] Legler F, Meyer-Arndt L, M¨odl L, Kedor C, Freitag H, Stein E, et al. Long-term 
symptom severity and clinical biomarkers in post-COVID-19/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: results from a prospective observational cohort. EClinicalMedicine 
2023;63:102146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102146.
[25] Sotzny F, Blanco J, Capelli E, Castro-Marrero J, Steiner S, Murovska M, et al. 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome - evidence for an 
autoimmune disease. Autoimmun Rev 2018;17(6):601–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.autrev.2018.01.009.
[26] Freitag H, Szklarski M, Lorenz S, Sotzny F, Bauer S, Philippe A, et al. 
Autoantibodies to vasoregulative G-Protein-coupled receptors correlate with 
symptom severity, autonomic dysfunction and disability in Myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin Med 2021;10(16). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/jcm10163675.
[27] Sotzny F, Filgueiras IS, Kedor C, Freitag H, Wittke K, Bauer S, et al. Dysregulated 
autoantibodies targeting vaso- and immunoregulatory receptors in Post COVID 
Syndrome correlate with symptom severity. Front Immunol 2022;13:981532. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.981532.
[28] Cabral-Marques O, Halpert G, Schimke LF, Ostrinski Y, Vojdani A, Baiocchi GC, 
et al. Autoantibodies targeting GPCRs and RAS-related molecules associate with 
COVID-19 severity. Nat Commun 2022;13(1):1220. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41467-022-28905-5.
[29] Seibert FS, Stervbo U, Wiemers L, Skrzypczyk S, Hogeweg M, Bertram S, et al. 
Severity of neurological Long-COVID symptoms correlates with increased level of 
autoantibodies targeting vasoregulatory and autonomic nervous system 
receptors. Autoimmun Rev 2023;22(11):103445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
autrev.2023.103445.
[30] Kimura Y, Sato W, Maikusa N, Ota M, Shigemoto Y, Chiba E, et al. Free-water- 
corrected diffusion and adrenergic/muscarinic antibodies in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J Neuroimaging 2023;33(5): 
845–51. https://doi.org/10.1111/jon.13128.
[31] Paffrath A, Kim L, Kedor C, Stein E, Rust R, Freitag H, et al. Impaired hand grip 
strength correlates with greater disability and symptom severity in post-COVID 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin Med 2024;13(7): 
2153. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13072153.
[32] Joseph P, Arevalo C, Oliveira RKF, Faria-Urbina M, Felsenstein D, Oaklander AL, 
et al. Insights from invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing of patients with 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Chest 2021;160(2): 
642–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2021.01.082.
[33] Singh I, Joseph P, Heerdt PM, Cullinan M, Lutchmansingh DD, Gulati M, et al. 
Persistent exertional intolerance after COVID-19: insights from invasive 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Chest 2022;161(1):54–63. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chest.2021.08.010.
[34] Petter E, Scheibenbogen C, Linz P, Stehning C, Wirth K, Kuehne T, et al. Muscle 
sodium content in patients with Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. J Transl Med 2022;20(1):580. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-022- 
03616-z.
[35] Aschman T, Wyler E, Baum O, Hentschel A, Rust R, Legler F, et al. Post-COVID 
exercise intolerance is associated with capillary alterations and immune 
dysregulations in skeletal muscles. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2023;11(1):193. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-023-01662-2.
[36] Daniell J, Brand J, Paessler D, Heydecke J, Schoening S, McLennan A. The rising 
cost of long COVID and ME/CFS in Germany. ME/CFS Research Foundation and 
Risklayer; 2025.
[37] Technical University of Munich. PEDNET-LC - Pediatric network for care and 
clinical research. Identifier: ZMII2-2525KLCA08. [cited 2025 26.06.2025]; 
Available from, https://www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de/ministeriu 
m/ressortforschung/handlungsfelder/forschungsschwerpunkte/long-/post- 
covid/modul-1-kiju/pednet-lc.html; 2024.
[38] Hieber H, Pricoco R, Gerrer K, Heindrich C, Wiehler K, Mihatsch LL, et al. The 
German multicenter registry for ME/CFS (MECFS-R). J Clin Med 2024;13(11): 
3168.
[39] Peo L-C, Wiehler K, Paulick J, Gerrer K, Leone A, Viereck A, et al. Pediatric and 
adult patients with ME/CFS following COVID-19: a structured approach to 
diagnosis using the Munich Berlin Symptom Questionnaire (MBSQ). Eur J Pediatr 
2024;183(3):1265–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-023-05351-z.
[40] Medical University of Vienna. The national reference center for post-viral 
syndromes [cited 2024 26.06.2025]; Available from, https://www.meduniwien. 
ac.at/web/en/referenzzentrum-postvirale-syndrome/; 2024.
[41] Hoffmann K, Hainzl A, Stingl M, Kurz K, Biesenbach B, Bammer C, et al. 
Interdisziplin¨ares, kollaboratives D-A-CH Konsensus-Statement zur Diagnostik 
und Behandlung von Myalgischer Enzephalomyelitis/Chronischem Fatigue- 
Syndrom. Wien Klin Wochenschr 2024;136(5):103–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00508-024-02372-y.
[42] Hainzl A, Rohrhofer J, Schweighardt J, Hermisson J, Hoffmann K, Komenda- 
Lett M, et al. Care for ME/CFS - Praxisleitfaden für die Versorgung von ME/CFS 
Betroffenen. Zenodo 2024. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12913216.
[43] Sigurdsson B, Gudmundsson K. Clinical findings six years after outbreak of 
Akureyri disease. Lancet 1956;267(6926):766–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(56)91236-3.
[44] Sigurdsson B, Sigurj´ONsson J, Sigurdsson JHJ, Thorkelsson J, Gudmundsson KR. 
A disease epidemic in iceland simulating poliomyelitis. Am J Epidemiol 1950;52 
(2):222–38. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a119421.
[45] Hyde B, Bergmann S. Akureyri disease (Myalgic Encephalomyelitis), Forty Years 
Later. Lancet 1988;332(8621):1191–2. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(88) 
90255-3.
[46] Líndal E, Bergmann S, Thorlacius S, Stef´ansson JG. Anxiety disorders: a result of 
long-term chronic fatigue - the psychiatric characteristics of the sufferers of 
Iceland disease. Acta Neurol Scand 1997;96(3):158–62. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
j.1600-0404.1997.tb00259.x.
[47] A new clinical entity? Lancet 1956;267(6926):789–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(56)91252-1.
[48] Sommerfelt K, Schei T, Seton KA, Carding SR. Assessing functional capacity in 
Myalgic encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome: a patient-informed 
questionnaire. J Clin Med 2024;13(12):3486.
[49] German Clinical Trials Register (DRKS). CFS_CARE care study for patients with 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): rehabilitation of 
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Identifier: DRKS00028115. [cited 2025 
26.06.2025]; Available from, https://drks.de/search/en/trial/DRKS00028115/ 
entails; 2024.
[50] Ware Jr JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 1992;30(6):473–83.
[51] J¨akel B, Kedor C, Grabowski P, Wittke K, Thiel S, Scherbakov N, et al. Hand grip 
strength and fatigability: correlation with clinical parameters and diagnostic 
suitability in ME/CFS. J Transl Med 2021;19(1):159. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12967-021-02774-w.
[52] German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM). Long COVID 
off-label expert commission [cited 2025 26.06.2025]; Available from, https 
://www.bfarm.de/DE/Arzneimittel/Zulassung/Zulassungsrelevante-Themen 
/Expertengruppe-Long-COVID-Off-Label-Use/_node.html; 2023.
[53] McIntyre RS, Phan L, Kwan ATH, Mansur RB, Rosenblat JD, Guo Z, et al. 
Vortioxetine for the treatment of post-COVID-19 condition: a randomized 
controlled trial. Brain 2024;147(3):849–57. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/ 
awad377.
[54] Le GH, Kwan ATH, Guo Z, Teopiz KM, Wong S, Meshkat S, et al. Impact of 
vortioxetine on depressive symptoms moderated by symptoms of anxiety in 
persons with post-COVID-19 condition: a secondary analysis. Psychiatry Res 
2024;339:116068. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2024.116068.
[55] Kwan ATH, Guo Z, Ceban F, Le GH, Wong S, Teopiz KM, et al. Assessing the 
effects of metabolic disruption, body mass index and inflammation on depressive 
symptoms in post-COVID-19 condition: a randomized controlled trial on 
vortioxetine. Adv Ther 2024;41(5):1983–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12325- 
024-02826-9.
[56] Pardini M, Cordano C, Benassi F, Mattei C, Sassos D, Guida S, et al. Agomelatine 
but not melatonin improves fatigue perception: a longitudinal proof-of-concept 
study. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2014;24(6):939–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.euroneuro.2014.02.010.
[57] Medvedev VE, Bogolepova AN, Morozov DP, Kvasnikov BB. Antidepressant and 
anxiolytic efficacy and tolerability of agomelatine in the treatment of depression 
after COVID-19 in daily clinical practice (non-interventional study TELESPHOR). 
Neurol Neuropsych Psychosom 2024;16(6):61–70. https://doi.org/10.14412/ 
2074-2711-2024-6-61-70.
[58] Taub Pam R, Zadourian A, Lo Hannah C, Ormiston Cameron K, Golshan S, Hsu 
Jonathan C. Randomized trial of Ivabradine in patients with hyperadrenergic 
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. JACC 2021;77(7):861–71. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.12.029.
[59] Abdelnabi M, Saleh Y, Ahmed A, Benjanuwattra J, Leelaviwat N, Almaghraby A. 
Ivabradine effects on COVID-19-associated postural orthostatic tachycardia 
syndrome: a single center prospective study. Am J Cardiovasc Dis 2023;13(3): 
162–7.
[60] O'Kelly B, Vidal L, McHugh T, Woo J, Avramovic G, Lambert JS. Safety and 
efficacy of low dose naltrexone in a long covid cohort; an interventional pre-post 
study. Brain Behav Immun Health 2022;24:100485. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbih.2022.100485.
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
13 

[61] Bramante CT, Beckman KB, Mehta T, Karger AB, Odde DJ, Tignanelli CJ, et al. 
Favorable antiviral effect of metformin on SARS-CoV-2 viral load in a 
randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial of COVID-19. Clin Infect Dis 2024; 
79(2):354–63. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciae159.
[62] Sommerfelt K, Schei T, Angelsen A. Severe and very severe Myalgic 
encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome ME/CFS in Norway: symptom burden 
and access to care. J Clin Med 2023;12(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
jcm12041487.
[63] Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, Klimas NG, Broderick G, 
Mitchell T, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis: international consensus criteria. 
J Intern Med 2011;270(4):327–38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 
2796.2011.02428.x.
[64] Joseph P, Pari R, Miller S, Warren A, Stovall MC, Squires J, et al. Neurovascular 
dysregulation and acute exercise intolerance in Myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomized, Placebo-Controlled trial of 
pyridostigmine. Chest 2022;162(5):1116–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chest.2022.04.146.
[65] Haunhorst S, Dudziak D, Scheibenbogen C, Seifert M, Sotzny F, Finke C, et al. 
Towards an understanding of physical activity-induced post-exertional malaise: 
Insights into microvascular alterations and immunometabolic interactions in 
post-COVID condition and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Infection 2025;53(1):1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s15010-024-02386-8.
[66] Leitner BP, Joseph P, Quast AF, Ramirez MA, Heerdt PM, Villalobos JG, et al. The 
metabolic and physiologic impairments underlying long COVID associated 
exercise intolerance. Pulm Circ 2024;14(4):e70009. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
pul2.70009.
[67] Grau M, Presche A, Kruger AL, Bloch W, Haiduk B. Red blood cell morphology is 
associated with altered Hemorheological properties and fatigue in patients with 
long COVID. Biol-Basel 2024;13(11). https://doi.org/10.3390/biology13110948.
[68] Grau M, Ibershoff L, Zacher J, Bros J, Tomschi F, Diebold KF, et al. Even patients 
with mild COVID-19 symptoms after SARS-CoV-2 infection show prolonged 
altered red blood cell morphology and rheological parameters. J Cell Mol Med 
2022;26(10):3022–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.17320.
[69] Simpson LO, O'Neill DJ. The results from red cell shape analyses of blood samples 
from members of Myalgic encephalomyelitis organisations in four countries. 
J Orthomol Med 1997;49(5).
[70] Guarnieri JW, Dybas JM, Fazelinia H, Kim MS, Frere J, Zhang Y, et al. Core 
mitochondrial genes are down-regulated during SARS-CoV-2 infection of rodent 
and human hosts. Sci Transl Med 2023;15(708):eabq1533. https://doi.org/ 
10.1126/scitranslmed.abq1533.
[71] Langston PK, Sun Y, Ryback BA, Mueller AL, Spiegelman BM, Benoist C, et al. 
Regulatory T cells shield muscle mitochondria frominterferon-γ–mediated 
damage to promote thebeneficial effects of exercise. Sci Immunol 2023;8(89). 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.adi5377.
[72] Haunhorst S, Bloch W, Javelle F, Krüger K, Baumgart S, Drube S, et al. A scoping 
review of regulatory T cell dynamics in convalescent COVID-19 patients - 
indications for their potential involvement in the development of Long COVID? 
Front Immunol 2022;13:1070994. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fimmu.2022.1070994.
[73] Charlton BT, Slaghekke A, Appelman B, Eggelbusch M, Huijts JY, Noort W, et al. 
Skeletal muscle properties in long COVID and ME/CFS differ from those induced 
by bed rest. 2025. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.02.25326885.
[74] Bizjak DA, Ohmayer B, Buhl JL, Schneider EM, Walther P, Calzia E, et al. 
Functional and morphological differences of muscle mitochondria in chronic 
fatigue syndrome and post-COVID syndrome. Int J Mol Sci 2024;25(3). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijms25031675.
[75] Vollrath S, Bizjak DA, Zorn J, Matits L, Jerg A, Munk M, et al. Recovery of 
performance and persistent symptoms in athletes after COVID-19. PloS One 2022; 
17(12):e0277984. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0277984.
[76] Scheibenbogen C, Wirth Klaus J. Key pathophysiological role of skeletal muscle 
disturbance in post COVID and Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS): accumulated evidence. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2025; 
16(1):e13669. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.13669.
[77] Pirkmajer S, Chibalin AV. Na,K-ATPase regulation in skeletal muscle. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metabol 2016;311(1):E1–31. https://doi.org/10.1152/ 
ajpendo.00539.2015.
[78] Kostic M, Katoshevski T, Sekler I. Allosteric regulation of NCLX by mitochondrial 
membrane potential links the metabolic state and Ca2+ signaling in 
mitochondria. Cell Rep 2018;25(12):3465–75. e4, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
celrep.2018.11.084.
[79] Hoheisel F, Fleischer KM, Rubarth K, Sepúlveda N, Bauer S, Konietschke F, et al. 
Autoantibodies to arginine-rich sequences mimicking epstein-barr virus in post- 
COVID and Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. medRxiv 2024. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.30.24319800. p. 2024.12.30.24319800.
[80] Lien K, Johansen B, Veierod MB, Haslestad AS, Bohn SK, Melsom MN, et al. 
Abnormal blood lactate accumulation during repeated exercise testing in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Physiol Rep 2019;7(11):e14138. 
https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.14138.
[81] Fluge O, Mella O, Bruland O, Risa K, Dyrstad SE, Alme K, et al. Metabolic 
profiling indicates impaired pyruvate dehydrogenase function in myalgic 
encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight 2016;1(21):e89376. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.89376.
[82] Hoel F, Hoel A, Pettersen IK, Rekeland IG, Risa K, Alme K, et al. A map of 
metabolic phenotypes in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. JCI Insight 2021;6(16). https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.149217.
[83] Hoel A, Hoel F, Dyrstad SEF, Chapola H, Rekeland IG, Risa K, et al. Charting the 
circulating proteome in ME/CFS: cross system profiling and mechanistic insights. 
medRxiv 2025. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.28.25328245. p. 
2025.05.28.25328245.
[84] Goebel A, Krock E, Gentry C, Israel MR, Jurczak A, Urbina CM, et al. Passive 
transfer of fibromyalgia symptoms from patients to mice. J Clin Invest 2021;131 
(13). https://doi.org/10.1172/jci144201.
[85] Chen H-J, Appelman B, Willemen H, Bos A, Prado J, Geyer CE, et al. Transfer of 
IgG from long COVID patients induces symptomology in mice. bioRxiv 2024. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.05.30.596590. p. 2024.05.30.596590.
[86] Mignolet M, Deroux C, Bielarz V, Georges F, Jamoulle M, Diederich C, et al. 
Passive transfer of IgG from patients with long-COVID neurological symptoms 
induces tactile allodynia in Mice. In: Demystifying Long Covid. International 
Conference; 2024.
[87] Loebel M, Eckey M, Sotzny F, Hahn E, Bauer S, Grabowski P, et al. Serological 
profiling of the EBV immune response in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome using a 
peptide microarray. PloS One 2017;12(6):e0179124. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0179124.
[88] Sepúlveda N, Malato J, Sotzny F, Grabowska AD, Fonseca A, Cordeiro C, et al. 
Revisiting IgG antibody reactivity to Epstein-Barr Virus in Myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and its potential application to 
disease diagnosis. Front Med (Lausanne) 2022;9:921101. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fmed.2022.921101.
[89] Prüss H. Autoantibodies in neurological disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2021;21(12): 
798–813. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-021-00543-w.
[90] Franke C, Ferse C, Kreye J, Reincke SM, Sanchez-Sendin E, Rocco A, et al. High 
frequency of cerebrospinal fluid autoantibodies in COVID-19 patients with 
neurological symptoms. Brain Behav Immun 2021;93:415–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.022.
[91] Franke C, Boesl F, Goereci Y, Gerhard A, Schweitzer F, Schroeder M, et al. 
Association of cerebrospinal fluid brain-binding autoantibodies with cognitive 
impairment in post-COVID-19 syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 2023;109:139–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2023.01.006.
[92] Cervia-Hasler C, Brüningk SC, Hoch T, Fan B, Muzio G, Thompson RC, et al. 
Persistent complement dysregulation with signs of thromboinflammation in 
active Long Covid. Science 2024;383(6680):eadg7942. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.adg7942.
[93] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Phase 2a, double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial of methylprednisolone versus placebo in patients with 
cognitive deficits in post-COVID-19 syndrome (PCS). ClinicalTrials.gov. 
Identifier: NCT05986422. Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NC 
T05986422; 2023.
[94] Franke C, Raeder V, Boesl F, Bremer B, Adam LC, Gerhard A, et al. Randomized 
controlled double-blind trial of methylprednisolone versus placebo in patients 
with post-COVID-19 syndrome and cognitive deficits: study protocol of the post- 
corona-virus immune treatment (PoCoVIT) trial. Neurol Res Pract 2024;6(1):16. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s42466-024-00311-w.
[95] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Double-blinded, randomized, sham- 
controlled trial of immunoadsorption (IA) in patients with chronic fatigue 
syndrome (CFS) including patients with post-acute COVID-19 CFS (PACS-CFS). 
ClinicalTrials.gov. Identifier: NCT05710770. Available from, https://clinicaltrials 
.gov/study/NCT05710770; 2023.
[96] Preßler H, Machule M-L, Ufer F, Bünger I, Li LY, Buchholz E, et al. IA-PACS-CFS: a 
double-blinded, randomized, sham-controlled, exploratory trial of 
immunoadsorption in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) including 
patients with post-acute COVID-19 CFS (PACS-CFS). Trials 2024;25(1):172. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-024-07982-5.
[97] Lundberg-Morris L, Leach S, Xu Y, Martikainen J, Santosa A, Gissl´en M, et al. 
Covid-19 vaccine effectiveness against post-covid-19 condition among 589 722 
individuals in Sweden: population based cohort study. BMJ 2023;383:e076990. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2023-076990.
[98] Arlt FA, Breuer A, Trampenau E, Boesl F, Kirchner M, Mertins P, et al. High serum 
prevalence of autoreactive IgG antibodies against peripheral nerve structures in 
patients with neurological post-COVID-19 vaccination syndrome. Front Immunol 
2024;15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1404800.
[99] Loebel M, Grabowski P, Heidecke H, Bauer S, Hanitsch LG, Wittke K, et al. 
Antibodies to β adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in patients with 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 2016;52:32–9. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbi.2015.09.013.
[100] Tanaka S, Kuratsune H, Hidaka Y, Hakariya Y, Tatsumi KI, Takano T, et al. 
Autoantibodies against muscarinic cholinergic receptor in chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Int J Mol Med 2003;12(2):225–30. https://doi.org/10.3892/ 
ijmm.12.2.225.
[101] Germain A, Jaycox JR, Emig CJ, Ring AM, Hanson MR. An in-depth exploration of 
the autoantibody immune profile in ME/CFS using novel antigen profiling 
techniques. Int J Mol Sci 2025;26(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26062799.
[102] Kimura Y, Sato N, Ota M, Shigemoto Y, Morimoto E, Enokizono M, et al. Brain 
abnormalities in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: 
Evaluation by diffusional kurtosis imaging and neurite orientation dispersion and 
density imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 2019;49(3):818–24. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/jmri.26247.
[103] Fujii H, Sato W, Kimura Y, Matsuda H, Ota M, Maikusa N, et al. Altered structural 
brain networks related to adrenergic/muscarinic receptor autoantibodies in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Neuroimaging 2020;30(6):822–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/jon.12751.
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
14 

[104] Sato W, Ono H, Matsutani T, Nakamura M, Shin I, Amano K, et al. Skewing of the 
B cell receptor repertoire in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 2021;95:245–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbi.2021.03.023.
[105] Raveney BJE, Yamamura T, Oki S. Neuropilin-1 (NRP1): a new marker for 
pathogenic autoreactive T-helper cells in autoimmune disease. Clin Exp 
Neuroimmunol 2023;14(3):126–7. https://doi.org/10.1111/cen3.12751.
[106] Stein E, Heindrich C, Wittke K, Kedor C, Rust R, Freitag H, et al. Efficacy of 
repeated immunoadsorption in patients with post-COVID myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and elevated β2-adrenergic receptor 
autoantibodies: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Region Health Europe 2025; 
49:101161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2024.101161.
[107] Lloyd A, Hickie I, Wakefield D, Boughton C, Dwyer J. A double-blind, placebo- 
controlled trial of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in patients with chronic 
fatigue syndrome. Am J Med 1990;89(5):561–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002- 
9343(90)90173-b.
[108] Vollmer-Conna U, Hickie I, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Tymms K, Wakefield D, Dwyer J, 
et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin is ineffective in the treatment of patients with 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Am J Med 1997;103(1):38–43. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/s0002-9343(97)90045-0.
[109] Rowe KS. Double-blind randomized controlled trial to assess the efficacy of 
intravenous gammaglobulin for the management of chronic fatigue syndrome in 
adolescents. J Psychiatr Res 1997;31(1):133–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022- 
3956(96)00047-7.
[110] Scheibenbogen C, Sotzny F, Hartwig J, Bauer S, Freitag H, Wittke K, et al. 
Tolerability and efficacy of s.c. IgG self-treatment in ME/CFS patients with IgG/ 
IgG subclass deficiency: a proof-of-concept study. J Clin Med 2021;10(11). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm10112420.
[111] Hogeweg M, Doevelaar A, Rieckmann S, Seibert F, Scholten D, Segelmacher M, 
et al. Intravenous immunoglobulins in the treatment of post-COVID: a 
case–control study. J Intern Med 2023;293(5):656–8. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
joim.13592.
[112] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Observational study of hyperbaric high 
pressure oxygen therapy (HBOT) in patients with post-COVID syndrome (PCS) 
and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). 
ClinicalTrials.gov. Identifier: NCT06118138. Available from, https://clinicaltrials 
.gov/study/NCT06118138; 2023.
[113] Hadanny A, Efrati S. The hyperoxic-hypoxic paradox. Biomolecules 2020;10(6). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/biom10060958.
[114] Hedetoft M, Garred P, Madsen MB, Hyldegaard O. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment is 
associated with a decrease in cytokine levels in patients with necrotizing soft- 
tissue infection. Physiol Rep 2021;9(6):e14757. https://doi.org/10.14814/ 
phy2.14757.
[115] Schottlender N, Gottfried I, Ashery U. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment: effects on 
mitochondrial function and oxidative stress. Biomolecules 2021;11(12). https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/biom11121827.
[116] Germain A, Ruppert D, Levine SM, Hanson MR. Metabolic profiling of a myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome discovery cohort reveals 
disturbances in fatty acid and lipid metabolism. Mol Biosyst 2017;13(2):371–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c6mb00600k.
[117] Wilkins HM, Harris JL, Carl SM, Lu J, Eva Selfridge J, et al. Oxaloacetate activates 
brain mitochondrial biogenesis, enhances the insulin pathway, reduces 
inflammation and stimulates neurogenesis. Hum Mol Genet 2014;23(24): 
6528–41. https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu371.
[118] Ijare O, Conway D, Cash A, Baskin D, Pichumani K. CBMT-49. In: Oxaloacetate 
alters glucose metabolism in glioblastoma: 13c isotopomer study. 21. Neuro- 
Oncology; 2019. https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noz175.171 (Supplement_6): 
p. vi43–vi4.
[119] Yoshikawa K. Studies on the anti-diabetic effect of sodium oxaloacetate. Tohoku J 
Exp Med 1968;96(2):127–41. https://doi.org/10.1620/tjem.96.127.
[120] Cash A, Kaufman DL. Oxaloacetate treatment for mental and physical fatigue in 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and Long-COVID 
fatigue patients: a non-randomized controlled clinical trial. J Transl Med 2022;20 
(1):295. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-022-03488-3.
[121] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Anhydrous Enol-Oxaloacetate (AEO) on 
improving fatigue in post-COVID-19 survivors. NCT04592354. Available from, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04592354; 2020.
[122] Cash A, Vernon SD, Rond C, Bateman L, Abbaszadeh S, Bell J, et al. RESTORE ME: 
a RCT of oxaloacetate for improving fatigue in patients with myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Front Neurol 2024;15:1483876. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1483876.
[123] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). A randomized double blind placebo 
controlled trial to determine the effects of oxaloacetate on improving fatigue in 
ME/CFS. NCT05273372. Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NC 
T05273372; 2022.
[124] Meadows D, Squires J, Dibble J, Palwayi S, Felsenstein D, Tannenbaum L, et al. 
Pyridostigmine and low-dose naltrexone for ME/CFS: study protocol for the life 
improvement trial (LIFT), a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical 
trial. Research Square 2024. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-5626167/v1.
[125] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). LIFT: life improvement trial. NCT06366724. 
Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06366724; 2024.
[126] Cant R, Dalgleish AG, Allen RL. Naltrexone inhibits IL-6 and TNFα production in 
human immune cell subsets following stimulation with ligands for intracellular 
toll-like receptors. Front Immunol 2017;8. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fimmu.2017.00809.
[127] Driver CN, D'Souza RS. Efficacy of low-dose naltrexone and predictors of 
treatment success or discontinuation in fibromyalgia and other chronic pain 
conditions: a fourteen-year, enterprise-wide retrospective analysis. Biomedicines 
2023;11(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11041087.
[128] Polo O, Pia P, Tuominen E. Low-dose naltrexone in the treatment of myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Fatigue: Biomed Health 
Behav 2019;7(4):207–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/21641846.2019.1692770.
[129] Remijn-Nelissen L, Verschuuren J, Tannemaat MR. The effectiveness and side 
effects of pyridostigmine in the treatment of myasthenia gravis: a cross-sectional 
study. Neuromuscul Disord 2022;32(10):790–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nmd.2022.09.002.
[130] Colovi´c MB, Krsti´c DZ, Lazarevi´c-Paˇsti TD, Bondˇzi´c AM, Vasi´c VM. 
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors: pharmacology and toxicology. Curr 
Neuropharmacol 2013;11(3):315–35. https://doi.org/10.2174/ 
1570159x11311030006.
[131] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Low dose sirolimus in people with post-acute 
sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC) long COVID-19. ClinicalTrials.gov. Identifier: 
NCT06960928. Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06960928; 
2025.
[132] Mannick JB, Del Giudice G, Lattanzi M, Valiante NM, Praestgaard J, Huang B, 
et al. mTOR inhibition improves immune function in the elderly. Sci Transl Med 
2014;6(268):268ra179. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3009892.
[133] Barros RDS, Queiroz LAD, Assis JBD, Pantoja KC, Bustia SX, Sousa ESAD, et al. 
Effects of low-dose rapamycin on lymphoid organs of mice prone and resistant to 
accelerated senescence. Front Immunol 2024;15. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fimmu.2024.1310505.
[134] Peluso MJ, Ryder D, Flavell RR, Wang Y, Levi J, LaFranchi BH, et al. Tissue-based 
T cell activation and viral RNA persist for up to 2 years after SARS-CoV-2 
infection. Sci Transl Med 2024;16(754):eadk3295. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
scitranslmed.adk3295.
[135] Peluso MJ, Swank ZN, Goldberg SA, Lu S, Dalhuisen T, Borberg E, et al. Plasma- 
based antigen persistence in the post-acute phase of COVID-19. Lancet Infect Dis 
2024;24(6):e345–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(24)00211-1.
[136] Peluso MJ, Anglin K, Durstenfeld MS, Martin JN, Kelly JD, Hsue PY, et al. Effect of 
oral nirmatrelvir on long COVID symptoms: 4 cases and rationale for systematic 
studies. Pathog Immun 2022;7(1):95–103. https://doi.org/10.20411/pai. 
v7i1.518.
[137] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). An interventional decentralized Phase 2, 
randomized, double-blind, 2-arm study to investigate the efficacy and safety of 
orally administered Nirmatrelvir/Ritonavir compared with placebo/ritonavir in 
participants with long COVID. NCT05668091. Available from, https://clinicaltria 
ls.gov/study/NCT05668091; 2022.
[138] Sawano M, Bhattacharjee B, Caraballo C, Khera R, Li SX, Herrin J, et al. 
Nirmatrelvir-ritonavir versus placebo-ritonavir in individuals with long COVID in 
the USA (PAX LC): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2, 
decentralised trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2025. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099 
(25)00073-8.
[139] Scheppke KA, Pepe PE, Jui J, Crowe RP, Scheppke EK, Klimas NG, et al. Remission 
of severe forms of long COVID following monoclonal antibody (MCA) infusions: a 
report of signal index cases and call for targeted research. Am J Emerg Med 2024; 
75:122–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2023.09.051.
[140] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Selective trial of paxlovid for PASC (STOP- 
PASC): randomized double-blind placebo-controlled pilot trial of Paxlovid for the 
treatment of PASC. NCT05576662. Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/s 
tudy/NCT05576662; 2022.
[141] Geng LN, Bonilla H, Hedlin H, Jacobson KB, Tian L, Jagannathan P, et al. 
Nirmatrelvir-ritonavir and symptoms in adults with postacute sequelae of SARS- 
CoV-2 infection: the STOP-PASC randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 
2024;184(9):1024–34. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2024.2007.
[142] Fluge Ø, Mella O. Clinical impact of B-cell depletion with the anti-CD20 antibody 
rituximab in chronic fatigue syndrome: a preliminary case series. BMC Neurol 
2009;9(1):28. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2377-9-28.
[143] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). B-cell depletion using the monoclonal anti- 
CD20 antibody rituximab in chronic fatigue syndrome. A double-blind, Placebo- 
controlled Study. 2009.
[144] Fluge Ø, Bruland O, Risa K, Storstein A, Kristoffersen EK, Sapkota D, et al. Benefit 
from B-lymphocyte depletion using the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab in chronic 
fatigue syndrome. A double-blind and placebo-controlled study. PloS One 2011;6 
(10):e26358. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026358.
[145] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). B-lymphocyte depletion using the 
monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody rituximab in chronic fatigue syndrome. An open 
label Phase II study with rituximab induction and maintenance treatment. 
NCT01156909. Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT01156909; 
2010.
[146] Fluge Ø, Risa K, Lunde S, Alme K, Rekeland IG, Sapkota D, et al. B-lymphocyte 
depletion in Myalgic encephalopathy/ chronic fatigue syndrome. An open-label 
phase II study with rituximab maintenance treatment. PloS One 2015;10(7): 
e0129898. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0129898.
[147] Fluge Ø, Rekeland IG, Lien K, Thürmer H, Borchgrevink PC, Sch¨afer C, et al. B- 
lymphocyte depletion in patients with Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 
2019;170(9):585–93. https://doi.org/10.7326/m18-1451.
[148] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). B-lymphocyte depletion using the 
monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody rituximab in chronic fatigue syndrome/Myalgic 
encephalopathy (CFS/ME). A multicentre, randomized, double-blind and placebo 
controlled Phase-III study with rituximab induction and maintenance treatment. 
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
15 

NCT02229942. Available from, https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT02229942; 
2014.
[149] Rekeland IG, Fosså A, Lande A, Ktoridou-Valen I, Sørland K, Holsen M, et al. 
Intravenous cyclophosphamide in Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. An open-label phase II study. Front Med 2020;7. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fmed.2020.00162.
[150] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Cyclophosphamide in Myalgic 
encephalopathy/ chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Part A: an open label 
Phase-II study with six intravenous cyclophosphamide infusions four weeks apart, 
and follow-up for 12 months. NCT02444091. Available from, https://clinicaltrials 
.gov/study/NCT02444091; 2015.
[151] Rekeland IG, Sørland K, Neteland LL, Fosså A, Alme K, Risa K, et al. Six-year 
follow-up of participants in two clinical trials of rituximab or cyclophosphamide 
in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. PloS One 2024;19(7): 
e0307484. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0307484.
[152] Fluge Ø, Tronstad KJ, Mella O. Pathomechanisms and possible interventions in 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). J Clin Invest 
2021;131(14). https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI150377.
[153] Fluge Ø, Rekeland IG, Sørland K, Alme K, Risa K, Bruland O, et al. Plasma cell 
targeting with the anti-CD38 antibody daratumumab in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome — a clinical pilot study. Front Med 
2025;12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2025.1607353.
[154] European Medicines Agency (EMA). A pilot study using subcutaneous injections 
of the anti-CD38 antibody daratumumab in six patients with moderate to severe 
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Resetting the humoral 
immune response in ME/CFS. 2022-000281-18. Available from, https://www.cli 
nicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/trial/2022-000281-18/NO; 2022.
[155] European Medicines Agency (EMA). Plasma cell targeting using the anti-CD38 
antibody daratumumab in patients with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME/CFS) – a 
randomized, placebo-controlled and double-blind phase II study. 2024-520094- 
13-00. Available from, https://euclinicaltrials.eu/ctis-public/view/2024-52 
0094-13-00?lang=en; 2025.
[156] National Library of Medicine (U.S.). An exploratory, placebo-controlled, double- 
blind, Phase II study of the efficacy and safety for Rituximab (genetical 
recombination) in Myalgia Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/ 
CFS). ClinicalTrials.gov. Identifier: NCT06952413. 2025; Available from, https 
://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06952413.
[157] Matsuda Y, Matsui T, Kataoka K, Fukada R, Fukuda S, Kuratsune H, et al. A two- 
year follow-up study of chronic fatigue syndrome comorbid with psychiatric 
disorders. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2009;63(3):365–73. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
j.1440-1819.2009.01954.x.
[158] Guo C, Che X, Briese T, Ranjan A, Allicock O, Yates RA, et al. Deficient butyrate- 
producing capacity in the gut microbiome is associated with bacterial network 
disturbances and fatigue symptoms in ME/CFS. Cell Host Microbe 2023;31(2): 
288–304.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2023.01.004.
[159] Kuchler T, Hausinger R, Braunisch MC, Günthner R, Wicklein R, Knier B, et al. All 
eyes on PCS: analysis of the retinal microvasculature in patients with post-COVID 
syndrome-study protocol of a 1 year prospective case-control study. Eur Arch 
Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2024;274(8):1847–56. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00406-023-01724-5.
[160] Fehrer A. Created in BioRender. https://BioRender.com/hmn2xdx; 2026.
A. Fehrer et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Autoimmunity Reviews 25 (2026) 104043 
16 
