Clinical and Translational Report
Multi-‘omics of gut microbiome-host interactions in
short- and long-term myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome patients
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Multi-‘omics identiﬁed phenotypic, gut microbial, and
metabolic biomarkers for ME/CFS
d Reduced gut microbial diversity and increased plasma
sphingomyelins in ME/CFS
d Short-term patients had more severe gut microbial dysbiosis
with decreased butyrate
d Long-term patients had more signiﬁcant metabolic and
clinical aberrations
Authors
Ruoyun Xiong, Courtney Gunter,
Elizabeth Fleming, Suzanne D. Vernon,
Lucinda Bateman, Derya Unutmaz,
Julia Oh
Correspondence
julia.oh@jax.org
In brief
ME/CFS is an understudied
multisystemic disease. Xiong et al.
present an integrated multi-‘omics
analysis comparing ME/CFS patients with
matched controls. Short-term disease
was characterized by greater gut
microbial dysbiosis, particularly a
depletion of butyrate-producing
microbes; long-term disease was
associated with more severe phenotypic
and metabolic abnormalities.
Xiong et al., 2023, Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287
February 8, 2023 ª 2023 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2023.01.001
ll

Clinical and Translational Report
Multi-‘omics of gut microbiome-host interactions
in short- and long-term myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome patients
Ruoyun Xiong,1,2 Courtney Gunter,1 Elizabeth Fleming,1 Suzanne D. Vernon,3 Lucinda Bateman,3 Derya Unutmaz,1
and Julia Oh1,4,*
1The Jackson Laboratory, Farmington, CT 06032, USA
2The University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA
3Bateman Horne Center, Salt Lake City, UT 84102, USA
4Lead contact
*Correspondence: julia.oh@jax.org
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2023.01.001
SUMMARY
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a complex, debilitating disorder manifest-
ing as severe fatigue and post-exertional malaise. The etiology of ME/CFS remains elusive. Here, we present
a deep metagenomic analysis of stool combined with plasma metabolomics and clinical phenotyping of two
ME/CFS cohorts with short-term (<4 years, n = 75) or long-term disease (>10 years, n = 79) compared with
healthy controls (n = 79). First, we describe microbial and metabolomic dysbiosis in ME/CFS patients.
Short-term patients showed signiﬁcant microbial dysbiosis, while long-term patients had largely resolved
microbial dysbiosis but had metabolic and clinical aberrations. Second, we identiﬁed phenotypic, microbial,
and metabolic biomarkers speciﬁc to patient cohorts. These revealed potential functional mechanisms un-
derlying disease onset and duration, including reduced microbial butyrate biosynthesis and a reduction in
plasma butyrate, bile acids, and benzoate. In addition to the insights derived, our data represent an important
resource to facilitate mechanistic hypotheses of host-microbiome interactions in ME/CFS.
INTRODUCTION
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)
is a complex, multi-system debilitating illness. The syndrome in-
cludes severe fatigue that is not alleviated by rest, post-exer-
tional malaise (PEM), muscle and joint pain, headaches, sleep
problems, hypersensitivity to sensory stimuli, and gastrointes-
tinal (GI) symptoms.1–3 In the US alone, ME/CFS affects up to
2.5 million people.4 Our limited understanding of both the
physiological changes associated with the syndrome and the
underlying biological mechanisms are major impediments to
identifying and developing both speciﬁc therapies and reliable
biomarker-based diagnostics.5,6
The human microbiome—the body’s trillions of bacteria, fungi,
and viruses—has recently emerged as an important potential
contributor to, or biomarker of ME/CFS.7 Patients have frequent
GI disturbances, and in lower-resolution studies based on 16S
rRNA gene sequencing, altered gut microbiota.7–13 Compared
with healthy controls, the microbial dysbiosis observed in
ME/CFS patients was characterized by decreased bacterial
diversity, overrepresentation of putative pro-inﬂammatory spe-
cies, and reductions in putative anti-inﬂammatory species.11,13
However, sample sizes for these studies were relatively small
with limited taxonomic resolution. Much remains underexplored
vis a vis the potential functional consequences of ME/CFS-asso-
ciated microbial changes.
An important function of the intestinal microbiota is meta-
bolism,14,15 feeding both microbial and host processes in its
dynamic, symbiotic, and mutualistic relationship with the host.
For example, the metabolic products of gut microbiota can feed
intohostpathwaysasenergysources16orfunctionasimmunereg-
ulators,17–19 including short-chain fatty acids (SFCAs),20 metabo-
lites of bile acids,21 or amino acid metabolites like tryptophan,22
respectively. Thus, the microbiome can modulate host physiology
via direct stimulatory effects23,24 or through secondary pathways
coupled to metabolic processes.25 Such host-microbe interac-
tions can be identiﬁed both through mechanistic studies26 but
also inferred by high-resolution proﬁling27,28 and integrated ana-
lyses of the gut microbiome29—the microbial ﬁngerprint—and
the host metabolome—the collective chemical ﬁngerprint.
Here, we performed a high-resolution characterizationof the gut
microbiome and the plasma metabolome in two ME/CFS cohorts
compared with healthy controls. In an important departure from
current studies, we proﬁled a ‘‘short-term’’ cohort (diagnosed
within the previous 4 years), vs. a ‘‘long-term’’ cohort (patients
who have been suffering from ME/CFS for more than 10 years).
Our goal was to gain an understanding of the baseline molecular
mechanisms by which changes in the ME/CFS microbiome may
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023 ª 2023 Elsevier Inc.
273
ll

be reﬂected in circulating metabolic markers, which could then
potentiate further alterations in host physiology. In addition, we
sought to identify potential molecular and biological markers of
ME/CFS progression between the short- and long-term cohorts.
Finally, we collected detailed clinical and lifestyle survey metadata
for association analysis. Shotgun sequencing of the fecal micro-
biome of 149 ME/CFS patients (74 short- and 75 long-term
patients) vs. 79 age- and sex-matched healthy controls, we found
that short-term ME/CFS patients had more signiﬁcant microbial
and GI abnormalities and that long-term patients tended to estab-
lish a stable, but individualized, gut microbiome. However, long-
term patients had signiﬁcantly more irreversible health problems
and
progressive
metabolic
aberrations.
Finally,
integrating
detailed clinical and lifestyle survey metadata with these high-res-
olution ‘omics data allowed us to develop a highly accurate
ME/CFS disease classiﬁer. Taken together, our study presents a
high-resolution, multi-cohort, and multi-‘omics analysis, and
provides a mechanistic hypotheses of host-microbiome interac-
tions in ME/CFS.
RESULTS
Data characteristics
We enrolled 228 participants: 149 with ME/CFS (74 short- and 75
long-term patients) and 79 approximately age- and sex-matched
healthy controls (Figure 1; Tables S1 and S2). The short-term
and long-term cohorts were designed to obtain a better under-
standing of the biological processes during the progression of
ME/CFS. The cohort was 96.5% Caucasian, with an average age
of43years and 67% female, characteristics consistentwith epide-
miological reports that women are from three to four times more
susceptible to ME/CFS than men.30 We collected detailed clinical
metadata (Tables S1 and S2), stool samples for shotgun metage-
nomics, and blood for targeted metabolomic analysis. Clinical
metadata (n = 228) and blood samples (n = 184) were collected
at the time of enrollment, followed by self-collection of fecal
samples (n = 224) within the following 2 weeks (n = 180 complete
datasets of metadata, blood, and stool). We established a work-
ﬂow to integrate the 906 clinical features into major disease
markers tooptimizedatadimensionality (Figure1).Whole-genome
shotgun metagenomic sequencingofthe stool samples generated
an average of 10,801,733 high-quality and classiﬁable reads per
sample, which were then reconstructed to examine gut micro-
biome composition (species N = 384, Table S3) and gene function
(gene N = 9,652, Table S4). Plasma was fractionated from blood
and sent for targeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS) analysis, where 1,278 metabolites were identiﬁed for
host molecular ‘omics proﬁling (Table S5). Finally, we analyzed
each data type individually, then altogether to build multi-‘omics
models to describe and predict onset, stage ofdisorder, and asso-
ciated microbial and metabolic features. This allowed us to target
microbial pathways likely to affect host-microbiome interactions
Figure 1. Summary of study design and analytical pipeline
We collected detailed clinical metadata, fecal samples, and blood samples for 228 individuals in three cohorts: healthy controls, patients with short-term (<4 years)
or long-term (>10 years) ME/CFS. A comprehensive ‘omics workﬂow was constructed with the multi-data types (phenotypic, metagenomics, and metabolomics,
respectively) and multi-computational models to understand potential host-microbe interactions. LC-MS, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
274
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

and alter the disease pathophysiology. For all datatypes, we per-
formedtwo primary comparisons:(1) ME/CFSvs. healthycontrols,
tounderstandthebroaddifferencesinherenttothedisease,and(2)
short- vs. long-term ME/CFS vs. healthy controls, to understand
disease progression.
The host phenotype in ME/CFS
To understand and interpret the host phenotype of ME/CFS
comparedwithhealthy controls, wecollected comprehensive clin-
ical metadata including detailed demographics and lifestyle infor-
mation, an itemized dietary intake survey, medical history records,
three general questionnaires regarding the physical and mental
health of all participants, and ﬁve patient-speciﬁc surveys encom-
passingME/CFSclinicalsymptomsandmeasurements(TablesS1
and S2). We ﬁrst excluded possible dietary biases and then estab-
lished that the dietary habits were comparable among all groups
(Figure S1; Tables S1 and S2). We also found that the frequency
of previous acute infections (Figure S1, chi-squared test,
p < 0.001), which supports the potential association of infections
with the onset of ME/CFS.31 Our naive Bayesian classiﬁcation
model (Figure S2A, a measure of classiﬁcation accuracy, area un-
der the curve [AUC] = 0.85), which we used to identify clinical fea-
tures that discriminate healthy controls vs. patients, showed that,
besides someannounced dysfunctionslikeorthostatic intolerance
and ﬁbromyalgia, most ME/CFS patients also suffered from
additional complications, such as depression, headaches, consti-
pation, and anxiety32,33 (Figure S2B). Altogether, these high-reso-
lution data echo the known pathophysiologies of ME/CFS and
established the clinical characteristics of our cohorts.34
ME/CFS patients have decreased gut microbial diversity
and greater heterogeneity
To begin to identify potential microbial mechanism(s) related to
these symptoms, we ﬁrst decoded the microbiota of ME/CFS pa-
tients. After classiﬁcation of our shotgun metagenomic dataset to
the species level (384 species passing quality cutoffs, see STAR
Methods and Table S3), we examined community-wide metrics
to understand if broad dysbiosis was observed in patients
compared with controls. Clustering using principal coordinate
analysis (Bray-Curtis dissimilarity distance, which reﬂects the sim-
ilarity of microbiome composition between each pairwise set of
samples) showed (1) most of sample variation was explained by
the onset ofME/CFS(Figure2F,permutational analysisofvariance
[PERMANOVA], p = 0.002) and was not inﬂuenced by the age dif-
ference between the control and patient groups (Figure S3;
Table S7), (2) patient samples had higher heterogeneity, as a pop-
ulation comparedwithcontrols(Figure2G,p < 0.01,control N = 79,
ME/CFS N = 149, heterogeneity was calculated over N = 384 spe-
cies, Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction). Interest-
ingly, high heterogeneity was also observed in our recent study of
frail older adults,35,36 suggesting a non-uniform adjustment to the
host’s changing physiological conditions.
High microbial biodiversity has increasingly been associated
with ecosystem health,37 with a less diverse (fewer members)
and less even structure (i.e., more heavily weighted with fewer
members) associated with decreased resilience and susceptibil-
ity to pathogenic colonization.38 ME/CFS patients had fewer
community members (Figure 2A, Chao 1 index; p < 0.001, control
N = 79, ME/CFS N = 149, Chao 1 index was calculated over
N = 384 species, Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correc-
tion), and lower Evar evenness (Figure 2B, p < 0.05, Wilcoxon
rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction). To understand if there
were speciﬁc species lacking in patients, we calculated a rarity
and dominance index. A decrease of Chao 1 (Figure 2A) and rar-
ity (Figure 2C, p < 0.05, Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni
correction) indicated that ME/CFS patients had fewer low-abun-
dance members. The lower Gini index from those dominant
species implied greater equality (Figure 2D, p < 0.01, Wilcoxon
rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction), with highly abundant
commensal species. We also noted a modest change in the ratio
of the overall relative abundance of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes
phyla (Figure 2E), a common metric for comparing broad compo-
sitional differences between microbiota, including IBD and other
inﬂammatory diseases.25,39,40
Finally, we predicted in situ growth rate of individual microbes
with our growth rate index (GRiD) algorithm, which leverages
coverage differences over a microbe’s genome to infer microbial
growth rate, a proxy for metabolic activity in a community.41
Interestingly, the species that grew slower in ME/CFS were pri-
marily Firmicutes (Figure 2H), suggesting a further nuance to
the
already
disproportionate
Firmicutes:Bacteroides
ratio.
Taken together, the gut microbiome of ME/CFS, similar to that
in aging and other chronic inﬂammatory disorders, was charac-
terized by modest but broad dysbiosis, including a less diverse
and more uneven gut microbiome community with higher hetero-
geneity and altered Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes ratio, supported by
a group of slower-replicating Firmicutes species.
Microbial dysbiosis occurs in short-term ME/CFS and
stabilizes in long-term disease
Our analyses thus far investigated major differentiating features
between ME/CFS patients and healthy controls. We wondered
if microbial and metabolomic markers changed signiﬁcantly
during the progression of ME/CFS, or if early features could
predict later severity. We analyzed our dataset comparing the
short-term with the long-term group. First, we evaluated the ef-
fect of age as a confounder but found no signiﬁcant differences
(PERMANOVA with age as a variate, p > 0.05, Wilcoxon rank-
sum test with Bonferroni correction, p > 0.05 (%50 years old
vs. >50-year-old subgroups, Figure S3; Table S7).
We then examined overall microbial composition differences
between the patient cohorts as previously performed (Figure 3A).
Interestingly, differences in the gut microbiome were more pro-
nounced and variable during early stages of the disease
compared with long-term patients and controls (Figures 3C–
3F, p < 0.05, pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni
correction). As noted, heterogeneity was a feature we observed
associated with aging, particularly frail aging. As we found no
confounding effect of age, we conjectured that these differences
were driven by ME/CFS disease duration. A signiﬁcant shift in the
Bacteroidetes (77.5%) to Firmicutes (19.4%) ratio was observed
only in short-term but not long-term patients (Figure 3B, pairwise
Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction, p < 0.05
short term; p > 0.1 long term vs. controls), explaining the modest
difference previously observed (Figure 2E).
To further resolve species-level differences between short-
term and long-term patients, we performed a pairwise compari-
son for the mean relative abundance of every species in the top
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
275

ﬁve most abundant phyla (Figure 3F). We discovered that spe-
cies that had atypical relative abundance in short-term patients
with respect to healthy controls (e.g., Bacteroidetes sp.) tended
to stabilize in late-stage patients, i.e., become relatively closer to
the relative abundance observed in controls.
Taken together, we found that microbial dysbiosis is most
marked early in ME/CFS disease, characterized by a loss of di-
versity driven by low-abundance bacteria with high heterogene-
ity. Over time, we conjecture that the microbiota then stabilizes
and reverts to an ecosystem more characteristic of healthy con-
trols, with the reacquisition of some low-abundance species and
normalization of diversity. These results highlight the importance
of stratifying by disease duration to identify features relevant to
disease progression.
ME/CFS is distinguishable with microbiome and
metabolomics features
Currently, there are no approved laboratory diagnostics avail-
able for ME/CFS,6 likely due to the heterogeneity of the disease.
We hypothesized that the combination of environmental and
clinical factors may assist in a more comprehensive disease
classiﬁcation. We constructed multiple state-of-the-art classi-
ﬁers for deep proﬁling. For metagenomic data, we used both
microbial species as well as gene relative abundance (identiﬁed
by KEGG gene proﬁling, see STAR Methods and Table S4) for
our classiﬁer, as we hypothesized that both species relative
abundance as well as gene-level differences could differ be-
tween cohorts. Thus, we constructed four models based on (1)
species and (2) KEGG gene relative abundances, (3) normalized
abundance of plasma metabolites, or (4) a combination of all
three (multi-‘omics, see STAR Methods), in addition to the clin-
ical classiﬁer described above. Irrespective of the model, results
obtained using multi-‘omics data (gradient boosting [GDBT]
model, AUC = 0.90) outperformed any individual dataset, fol-
lowed by the metabolome (AUC = 0.82), KEGG gene proﬁle
(AUC = 0.73), and species relative abundance (AUC = 0.73,
GDBT model, Figure 4B; LASSO logistic, support vector ma-
chine [SVM], and random forest [RF], Figure S4). This improved
performance of multi-‘omics for differentiating ME/CFS patients
from healthy controls underscores the complementarity of
different ‘omics in describing the molecular processes that can
occur with shifts in the host physiological state.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 2. Microbial dysbiosis in ME/CFS is characterized by decreased diversity and greater heterogeneity
(A–E) Comparing controls vs. ME/CFS patients (irrespective of disease stage), community structure differed in ME/CFS with (A) decreased richness (Chao 1
index, which measures the number of observed species); (B) decreased evenness (lower values of Smith and Wilson’s Evar index); (C) decreased rarity (smaller
proportion of the least abundant species [<0.2% relative abundance]); (D) decreased inequality (smaller Gini index of the dominant species [>0.2% relative
abundance]); (E) decreased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio. p values were computed by Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(F) First and second principal coordinates of dimensionality reduction for Bray-Curtis dissimilarity distances, which measures pairwise similarity of two given
samples. Values in brackets indicate the amount of total variability explained by each principal coordinates. p value and R2 were calculated by permutational
multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) test with patient/control as a variable.
(G) Increased heterogeneity observed in ME/CFS as measured by divergence, or Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. p value was computed by Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(H) Volcano plot showing differences in predicted growth rate in select species in ME/CFS. Each dot indicates a microbe, sized by the value of its inferred growth rate.
Thexaxisshowstheabsolutedifference(meangrowthrateinpatient—meangrowthrateincontrol)andthey axisisthelog10(pvalue,Wilcoxonrank-sumtest).Species
that were predicted to grow faster in patients were colored red and slower in blue. p value > 0.05 was considered not signiﬁcant (gray). See also Table S3.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
276
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

We then examined the most discriminatory features for each of
the individual ‘omics models to identify potential biomarkers and
to further biological interpretation (Figures 4A and S5). Low-
abundance microbes comprised the most discriminatory fea-
tures, including microbes implicated in tryptophan, butyrate,
and propionic acid production that were largely depleted in
ME/CFS (Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction
with over N = 384 species, p < 0.01, Figure S4). Metabolites
of both pathways are key immunomodulatory molecules that
regulate metabolic and endocrine functions.22,42–45 Microbial
genes that discriminated ME/CFS and were decreased included
genes involved in betaine production (grdD, grdE, and grdI), an
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 3. Signiﬁcant microbial dysbiosis in observed in short-term ME/CFS
(A) Taxonomic classiﬁcation at species-level resolution for all individuals in the three cohorts: healthy controls, short-term patients, and long-term patients.
Relative abundances of the most abundant gut species (top 25) are presented with gray representing the aggregate relative abundance of the remaining species.
Gastrointestinal symptom rating scale (GSRS) score, indicating the scale of gastrointestinal abnormality, is shown above for each individual.
(B–D) Similar to Figure 2, we showed differences in the microbial community structures in short-term and long-term patients in (B) composition at phylum level—
decreased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio in short-term patients; (C) reduced richness in short- and long-term (Chao 1 index, which measures the number of
observed species); (D) decreased evenness in short-term (lower values of Smith and Wilson’s Evar index). p values were computed by Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(E) Increased heterogeneity observed in long-term cohort as measured by divergence, or Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. p value was computed by Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(F) Each species in the ﬁve most abundant phyla were compared among three groups to observe the dynamics of gut community with respect to progression of
disease. Here, each point represents the average relative abundance for a given species, connected with a line that is colored by increase (red) or decrease (blue). p
valueswere computed by Wilcoxon signed-rank test. p value annotation legend: ns: p > 0.05, *0.01 < p % 0.05, **0.001 < p % 0.01, ***1e4 < p % 0.001, ****p % 1e4.
See also Table S3.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
277

anti-inﬂammatory metabolite.46,47 Besides betaine, sphingo-
myelin, serotonin, and cholesterol were highly discriminatory
features and have also been previously reported to be altered
in ME/CFS patients.6,48–50
Finally, because of inherent heterogeneity of ME/CFS, it
is possible that clinical or lifestyle factors could confound
this analysis. We sought to determine whether biomarkers of
interest were disease or confounder driven. We applied an
A
B
Figure 4. Out-performing multi-‘omics model identiﬁes microbial, metagenomic, and metabolic biomarkers for ME/CFS compared to
controls
(A) Biomarkers from three supervised gradient boosting (GDBT) models are shown. Models from top to bottom: species relative abundance, relative abundance
of KEGG gene proﬁle, normalized abundance of plasma metabolomics. The top ten most important features in each model are shown together with their general
functional class, raw abundance, and variance. From left to right: (1) functional annotations: species relative abundance model—the metabolic function (capacity
of butyrate, tryptophan, and propionate pathway); KEGG gene proﬁle model—the class identiﬁcation of the enzyme; metabolomics models—the superfamily for
the metabolite; (2) feature importance: features were ranked by their contribution to the model on the y axis; the x axis indicates the feature importance value from
each model; (3) average feature abundance in control and patient groups (Figure S4); (4) variation in mean relative abundance in control and patient groups with
coefﬁcient of variation.
(B) Performance of the classiﬁers using area under the curve (AUC) was evaluated using 10 randomized and 10-fold cross-validations for each model: species
relative abundance (pink), KEGG gene proﬁle (blue) or metabolites (orange) alone, or taken altogether (‘omics, green), which used the combination of the top 30
features from three models. See also Figure S4 and Tables S3–S5.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
278
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

unbiased general linear test (see STAR Methods and Table S7)
with an extensive array of metadata features. We found that
none of these biomarkers were signiﬁcantly correlated with
confounders. Additionally, from this general association study,
we observed that broader microbiome features, such as alpha
diversity, were not biased by metadata. However, a few metab-
olites (importantly, not those features selected in the ME/CFS
classiﬁcation model below) were inﬂuenced by gender, age,
and IBS(Irritable Bowel Syndrome) score (Figure S6). Despite
this, we concluded our microbiome and metabolomic analyses
are largely unconfounded by individual clinical and behavioral
features.
Severe phenotypic and metabolic abnormalities in long-
term ME/CFS
We then constructed individual and multi-‘omics models to
differentiate disease durations and controls. We followed this
by overrepresentation analysis (ORA) on metabolic pathways
and Bayesian classiﬁcation on phenotypic abnormalities to
further pinpoint distinctive patterns in different stages of
ME/CFS (see STAR Methods). Overall classiﬁcation accuracy
was lower than for overall disease but still relatively accurate
leveraging multi-‘omics data (AUC = 0.82, GDBT model, Fig-
ure S5). Low (<0.5%) relative abundance bacteria, including
several putative butyrate producers (Clostridium sp.),51 were
identiﬁed as potential biomarkers. The metabolomics model
also identiﬁed two cholesterol and several lipid metabolites as
discriminatory (Figure 5A; Table S6), consistent with the pheno-
typic classiﬁer, which identiﬁed many metabolic-related abnor-
malities (Figure 5C)52–59 to be more predictive in long-term
ME/CFS. However, we note that some of these phenotypes
also can increase with age, which is largely matched in our
cohort but may contribute to these differences.60,61 In addition,
we found that ﬁbromyalgia62 was a key feature distinguishing
short- vs. long-term disease, as was a trend toward worsening
sleep problems and more pronounced PEM in the later stage
of the disease (Figure 5B). Interestingly, we identiﬁed poor appe-
tite63 to be the most distinguishable phenotype in the short-term
group, which is consistent with a trend of more GI disturbances
in the early stage (Figures 3A and 5B).
ORA with the metabolomics proﬁles identiﬁed the most strik-
ing differences between short- and long-term patients and
controls. Unlike trends observed in the microbiome data with
the greatest dysbiosis observed in short-term patients, long-
term patients had more metabolites differentiating them from
healthy controls, especially in sphingolipids and diacylglycerol
metabolites (Figure 5C), conﬁrming previous metabolomic ﬁnd-
ings. Interestingly, most metabolic species either decreased
across experimental groups (control > short term > long term;
e.g., xanthine), or increased (control < short term < long term;
e.g., sphingomyelins, diacylglycerol, phosphatidylcholine, and
ceramides, p < 0.01, pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bon-
ferroni correction with N = 1,278 metabolites, see Figure 5D),
suggesting that metabolic irregularities associated with ME/
CFS may gradually worsen over time (Figure 5D). Taken
together, we postulate that long-term ME/CFS patients have
developed a unique but stable pathophysiology characterized
by more severe clinical symptoms and an array of altered host
metabolic reactions.
Gut and plasma butyrate is reduced in early-stage
disease and is associated with host abnormal
physiology
We noted in our metagenomics classiﬁcation model a particular
refrain
of
a
depletion
of
butyrate-synthesizing
microbes,
including Roseburia and F. prausnitzii in ME/CFS. Butyrate is a
major energy source for colonic epithelial cells and one of the
main intestinal anti-inﬂammatory metabolites.42,64 We thus per-
formed a focused metagenomic and metabolomic analysis of
the butyrate pathway to better understand its potential role in
the crosstalk between the gut microbiota and host physiology
in ME/CFS.
Strikingly, we found a depletion in plasma isobutyrate in the
short-term group (Figure 6A, p = 0.03, Wilcoxon rank-sum test
with Bonferroni correction with over N = 1,278 metabolites).65
Thus, we sought to link plasma metabolite abundance to gene-
coding potential of the microbiome. We performed differential
abundance analysis of KEGG gene matrix (p value computed
by Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction over N =
9,652 genes) and found that butanoate synthesis (KEGG
map00650) differentiated between patients and controls (Fig-
ure 6C; fold change and p value of each gene in butyrate
pathway is shown in Figure 6D, also in Table S4). Finally, we in-
ferred gut butyrate abundance from metagenomic data using a
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) metabolite prediction algo-
rithm (see STAR Methods), in the absence of matched gut me-
tabolomic data. Inferred concentrations of isobutyrate were
signiﬁcantly decreased in ME/CFS (Wilcoxon rank-sum test
with Bonferroni correction, p = 0.05), especially in the short-
term group (Figure 6B, pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test with
Bonferroni correction, p < 0.01).
Finally, we performed a Spearman correlation analysis with the
relative abundance of (1) butyrate-producing microbes or (2)
KEGG enzymes with plasma metabolites to identify the degree
to which this pathway may inﬂuence circulating metabolite levels
(Figure 6D; Table S4, p value computed by Spearman correlation
and correlated by Holm’s method with N = 18 species + N = 113
butyrate genes  N = 1,278 metabolites, see STAR Methods).
From the thousands of plasma metabolites tested, we identiﬁed
24 positive correlations, including moieties from propionates,
succinates, tryptophans, and hippurates, consistent with results
of our differential abundance analysis, as well as 12 negative cor-
relations, including sulfate and ursodeoxycholate moieties. The
further suggests that changes in the ability of the gut microbiome
to metabolize or synthesize SFCAs is reﬂected in dysbiosis of
these and related metabolites in plasma.
Microbiome and metabolomic biomarkers are shared
across additional ME/CFS cohorts
To explore the generalizability of our ﬁndings, we compared our
ﬁndings with those identiﬁed in (1) an additional time point for
our current cohort: we collected metagenomics and metabolo-
mics data again 1 year after their initial recruitment (n = 107
patients, n = 59 controls); (2) two independent cohorts: the mi-
crobiome cohort from Guo et al.66 with 197 long-term partici-
pants (n = 106 patients, n = 91 controls) and the metabolome
cohort from Germain et al.48 with 56 female individuals (n = 26
patients, n = 26 controls). While there are notable biological dif-
ferences in study design (e.g., long-term patients only vs. our
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
279

short- and long-term cohort, gender), we found that the main
conclusions and the identiﬁed biomarkers in ME/CFS were
largely shared across all cohorts, supporting the robustness of
our models and the validity of our ﬁndings.
First, the loss of gut microbial diversity in ME/CFS was
observed in both the external microbiome cohort and our second
time point. Guo et al. also found decreased evenness in the dis-
ease (Figure 2B). Most microbiome features that we at time point
1 were similar 1 year later (Figures 7A and 7B). Similarly, external
cohorts and our second time point supported the depletion of
butyrate producers and key butyrate-producing genes, indi-
cating that the microbial butyrate biosynthesis capability was
reduced in ME/CFS. Guo’s cohort measured fecal SCFAs (ace-
tate, propionate, and butyrate) by GC-MS and found signiﬁcant
decreases of acetate and butyrate in ME/CFS (Figure 7G). We
then validated our classiﬁers with plasma metabolomics data
A
B
C
D
Figure 5. Phenotypical and metabolic abnormality are most pronounced in long-term patients
(A) Multi-gradient boosting models identiﬁed most important species, genes, and metabolites differentiating controls, short-, or long-term ME/CFS. In each
model, the top ten features are ranked by their contribution to the model on the y axis, and the x axis indicates the feature importance value. The heatmap shows
the average feature abundance or relative abundance in each group. For full classiﬁcation model performance (AUCs), see also Figure S5.
(B) Naive Bayesian model based on medical history records classiﬁed the stage of disease and identiﬁed nine signiﬁcant clinical phenotypes in the long-term
cohort and one signiﬁcant phenotype in the short-term cohort. For each feature, the probability of experiencing the symptom in the long-term patients was
presented to the left on the x axis and the probability in the short-term patients was presented to the right.
(C) Overrepresentation analysis (ORA) on the plasma metabolome identiﬁed the most differential metabolites and pathways in the long-term group. For each
pathway, two comparisons were conducted, control vs. short term and control vs. long term. p values were computed by linear global t test, and the counts of
differential metabolites presented on the x axis.
(D) The trend of gradually changing metabolic irregularities along with the progression of disease are indicated by the difference between control, short-term and
long-term cohorts. Here, each point represents the average normalized abundance for a given metabolite in the top ﬁve most abundant superfamilies, connected
with a line that is colored by if increasing (red) or decreasing (blue). p values were computed by Wilcoxon signed-rank test. p value annotation legend: *0.01 < p %
0.05, **0.001 < p % 0.01, ***1e4 < p % 0.001, ****p % 1e4. See also Tables S5 and S6.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
280
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

A
B
C
D
Figure 6. Limited microbial butyrate biosynthesis capacity associates with reduced plasma isobutyrate and multiple blood metabolites
(A and B) In the blood and gut environment, decreased butyrate abundance in the short-term patient was indicated by (A) signiﬁcantly reduced plasma isobutyrate
normalized abundance and (B) decreased predicted gut isobutyrate in patients, especially in short-term patients. Boxes show median relative abundance and
interquartile ranges (IQRs); whiskers specify ±1.5 * IQR from the box’s quartile. p values were computed by Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(C) The reduced abundance of most key enzymes in the butanoate mechanism (KEGG pathway map00650) indicated a more limited microbial butyrate
biosynthesis capacity in ME/CFS. Differentiating enzymes were colored and annotated on the map (decreased in blue and increased in red).
(D) Correlation of plasma metabolite normalized abundance and relative abundance of microbial butyrate biosynthesis features, with fold changes. Heatmap
shows signiﬁcant correlations (Spearman, p < 0.05) with the top bar indicating the metabolite superfamily. The top half shows the key enzymes in the KEGG
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
281

from our second time point (Figure 7C) and Germain’s cohort
(Figure 7D). The performance of the models was strong (accu-
racy > 70%) and numerous shared biomarkers among cohorts.
Out of ten metabolic biomarkers identiﬁed from time point 1,
six were shared among cohorts (Figure 7E).
Taken together, we found that our microbial and metabolic
biomarkers were robust to cohort, supporting the reproducibility
of our conclusions in ME/CFS.
DISCUSSION
Here, we performed a large-scale multi-‘omics investigation
integrating detailed clinical and lifestyle data, gut metagenomics,
and plasma metabolomics in short- and long-term ME/CFS pa-
tients compared with healthy controls. Several studies have re-
ported a disrupted gut microbiome in ME/CFS11,13 as well as
changes in blood cytokine and metabolite levels. However, our
cohort design differentiating short- and long-term patients was
important to identify microbial and metabolic features that may
contribute to disease progression.
Notably, the most signiﬁcant microbial dysbiosis occurred in
short-term ME/CFS. Compositional differences in short-term
ME/CFS were consistent with previous studies using lower-res-
olution sequencing67 and an independent microbiome study
from Guo et al.66 co-published in this issue, identifying a broad
reduction in microbial diversity,68 alterations in the ratio of
Bacteroides:Firmicutes microbiota,10 and increased heteroge-
neity of low-abundance organisms. This latter feature has
recently been associated with the microbiome of frail older
adults and supports its general association with reduced health
outcomes.35 There are several potential explanations for this
early-stage dysbiosis. First, short-term patients suffer more GI
disturbances, and gut microbiome changes may reﬂect these
environmental changes. Second, it is possible that patients
may try a range of interventions that impact their gut micro-
biome, which is dynamic and inﬂuenced by numerous intrinsic
and extrinsic factors, including age and diet.69 Diet can not
only dramatically shift gut microbial community composition,
but it can alter the metabolic potential of the microbes and pro-
duction of immunomodulatory metabolites. We also analyzed
the detailed dietary metadata, showing that most dietary habits
are comparable among our cohorts, except infrequent sugar
intake in our short-term patients, which might also contribute
to the microbial differences observed in early stages of disease
(Table S1; Figure S1).
The return of the gut microbiome of long-term patients to a
conﬁguration more similar to healthy controls (with notable
differences nonetheless, in low-abundance species and in het-
erogeneity) as well as the reduced occurrence of GI illness in
this cohort, suggests a return to a relative homeostasis. Howev-
er, we conjecture that microbial dysbiosis seen in short-term
patients may have cumulative and long-term effects, where
damage may be caused by an initial trigger, resulting in
cascading events. Long-term patients, despite their relatively
more ‘‘control-like’’ gut microbiome, have more severe clinical
symptoms and metabolic dysbiosis. Thus, we hypothesize that
ME/CFS progression may begin with loss of beneﬁcial microbes,
particularly SCFA producers, resulting in more pervasive GI
phenotypes that is later reﬂected in plasma metabolite levels. In-
dividual-speciﬁc changes then lead to the irreversible metabolic
and phenotypic changes and unrecoverable ME/CFS. Other
possibilities for this ‘‘normalization’’ observed in long-term ME/
CFS include survival bias, as the cohort design for this study is
cross-sectional, not truly longitudinal, and it is possible that the
>10 years cohort is comprised individuals who have not seen
signiﬁcant improvement or decline in their symptoms, not that
disease progression normalizes by default.
The abnormalities in the short-term cohort could result in
potential increases in aberrant translocation of microbial metab-
olites that could affect host immune and metabolic processes.
For example, one of the changes we noted in short-term patients
was a reduction in potential immunomodulatory organisms
(butyrate and tryptophan producers, e.g., F. prausnitzii), which
we speculate could lead to long-term metabolic dysbiosis. The
reduced prevalence of the butanoate synthesis pathway and
the reduced relative abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria
among all patients, but especially in the short-term group, sug-
gested a loss of butyrate in the intestinal environment. This
was consistent with the decrease of isobutyrate measured in
the blood. We additionally note that some of these microbial sig-
natures, such as these changes in SCFA producers, have been
identiﬁed in other disease cohorts. For example, a particularly
interesting study examining the gut microbiome and metabo-
lome of cardiovascular disease70 suggested that major alter-
ations in both feature sets might begin signiﬁcantly before
clinical onset of disease, including a depletion of butyrate
producers. One possibility is that the microbial and metabolic
features identiﬁed here are less speciﬁc to ME/CFS but more
generally biomarkers of future disease risk.
Butyrate, tryptophan, and other microbial metabolites have
been linked to mucosal immune regulation, and our team pre-
viously showed a striking immune dysbiosis in different blood
immune markers, including changes in the functional capacity
of mucosal associated invariant T (MAIT) cells and Th17 cells,
and a decrease in the frequency of CD8+ T cells and natural
killer cells in long-term ME/CFS patients.71 This is an exciting
association because each of these cell types have been linked
to bacterial or fungal infections, respond to microbial metabo-
lites, and have been linked to the pathogenesis of autoimmune
or chronic inﬂammatory diseases. Thus, it is possible that the
microbiome primes or sustains an aberrant immune response
following disease onset. This is supported by an observed shift
from
a
predominantly
Th1
to
Th2
immune
response
in
ME/CFS.72
butanoate pathway. On the left, different fold changes between the two patient cohorts (short term vs. control and long term vs. control, respectively) indicated a
signiﬁcant decrease in butyrate biosynthetic capacity in the early stages of ME/CFS. p values were calculated in each group with Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Finally,
the bottom half shows the correlation between the relative abundance of predicted butyrate producers and plasma metabolites. Microbes were ordered by
relative abundance. For each microbe, the size of the dot indicates the mean abundance in each group and the color indicated fold change over the control group.
p value was computed by Kruskal-Wallis H test. p value annotation legend: *0.01 < p % 0.05, **0.001 < p % 0.01, ***1e4 < p % 0.001.
See also Table S6.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
282
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

There is currently no standard diagnostic test for ME/CFS
because of many phenotypes of ME/CFS are shared with other
disorders,5,6 such as ﬁbromyalgia. Here, our integration of multi-
ple ‘omics data signiﬁcantly increased classiﬁcation accuracy
and identiﬁed microbial and metabolic features that could
pinpoint potential hypotheses for further investigation and thera-
peutic strategies. Longitudinal sampling of short-term patients,
particularly as they progress to long-term disease, would help
to untangle directionality of microbial dysbiosis and potential ef-
fects on the blood metabolome. For example, recent studies
performing large-scale associations with the gut microbiome
and blood metabolome have identiﬁed that a signiﬁcant fraction
(upward of 15%) of blood metabolites can be predicted by gut
microbiome composition.73 However, understanding of the
temporal nature of this association is limited. Here, our ‘omics
workﬂows could be one of the guiding frameworks to intergrad-
ing microbiome, metabolome, and host phenotypes, and thus,
bring a more understanding to host-microbiome interactions.
Finally, we believe that recent potential associations between
the chronic immune dysfunctions in ME/CFS patients and ‘‘long
COVID’’ increase the relevance of the results reported here.
Long COVID refers to phenotypes suffered by numerous patients
infected by SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) that have ‘‘recovered,’’ but
did not return to full health. Notably, it manifests as numerous
phenotypical abnormalities shared with ME/CFS, including
lingering chronic fatigue and myalgias. In ME/CFS, key symp-
toms might also be triggered by acute infections including
SARS coronavirus, MERS,74 the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),75 or
other agents, and such infections were reported to be more
frequent in the medical histories of our patient cohort, even
preceding the onset of ME/CFS symptoms.76,77 Understanding
the biological mechanisms underlying ME/CFS may now have
further urgency and generalizability in the worldwide COVID-19
pandemic. Taken together, we have established a framework to
study host-microbiome interactions leveraging ‘omics to identify
host and microbial metabolites and functions implicit in ME/CFS,
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 7. Microbial and metabolomic features of ME/CFS identiﬁed in additional cohorts
(A–D) (A) Decreased richness and (B) increased heterogeneity (Bray-Curtis dissimilarity) in the gut microbiota were consistent in our second time point (Wilcoxon
rank-sum test). (B) The performance of our classiﬁers was assessed using ROC curves in (C) our second time point and (D) an independent cohort.48 The models
were colored by species relative abundance (pink), KEGG gene proﬁle (blue), and metabolites (orange).
(E) The fold change of important metabolic subpathways and biomarkers are shown from three cohorts: time points 1, 2, and an independent cohort. The shared
features with Germain’s study were highlighted in blue.
(F) The fold change of microbial biomarkers from the classiﬁer in time points 1 and 2. The shared biomarkers with Guo’s study are highlighted in blue.
(G) The fold change of key genes in the butyrate pathway across three cohorts. The shared essential genes from the acetyl-CoA branch are highlighted in blue.
See also Figure S7.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
283

presenting a rich clinical and ‘omics dataset to further mecha-
nistic hypotheses to better understand this debilitating disease.
Limitations of the study
This study was designed to recruit age-, sex-, and diet-matched
healthy cohort and patient cohort. However, we note that our
long-term cohort is slightly but signiﬁcantly older than the
short-term cohort (though age-matched in our healthy controls),
which could contribute to some of the phenotypes, particularly
clinical
abnormalities,
observed.
Additionally,
we
do
not
have matched cohorts with other disorders with overlapping
phenotypes, such as IBS, neuroinﬂammatory disorders, and
others. This is particularly relevant because ME/CFS is often
misdiagnosed. While our results support that we can very accu-
rately discriminate healthy individuals from ME/CFS patients,
future studies would include cohorts with matched individuals
with differing diagnoses to pinpoint microbial/metabolomic
changes that are speciﬁc to ME/CFS rather than general disease
risk. In addition, a rigorous control of exposures and co-morbid-
ities could more effectively narrow down on microbial and
metabolomic features that are ME/CFS-speciﬁc vs. a generaliz-
able risk or protective factors for inﬂammatory disease. In
advance of these data, the use of these features as potential
diagnostic biomarkers may be premature.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Cohort and study design
B Participants
d METHOD DETAILS
B Clinical metadata collection and preprocess
B Plasma sample collection and preparation
B Plasma untargeted metabolome by UPLC-MS/MS
B Fecal sample collection and DNA extraction
B Metagenomic shotgun sequencing
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Metabolome enrichment study
B Taxonomic and KEGG gene proﬁling of metagenomics
samples
B Microbial community structure analysis
B Gut metabolic status prediction
B Multi-‘omics classiﬁcation models
B Confounder analysis
B Interaction study and targeted pathway analysis
B Statistical Analysis
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chom.2023.01.001.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are thankful to the Oh, Unutmaz, and Li laboratories for inspiring discus-
sions, and we acknowledge the contribution of the Genome Technologies Ser-
vice at The Jackson Laboratory for expert assistance with sample sequencing
for the work described in this publication. We also thank the clinical support
team at the Bateman Horne Center and all the individuals who participated
in this study. This work was funded by 1U54NS105539. J.O. is additionally
supported by the NIH (1 R01 AR078634-01, DP2 GM126893-01, 1 U19
AI142733, and 1 R21 AR075174).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, D.U., J.O., S.D.V., L.B., and R.X.; data curation, R.X., C.G.,
S.D.V., and L.B.; formal analysis, R.X.; funding acquisition, D.U., J.O., S.D.V.,
and L.B.; clinical sample design and collection, S.D.V. and L.B.; investigation,
R.X., C.G., E.F., S.D.V., and L.B.; project administration, J.O., D.U., L.B.,
S.D.V., and C.G.; resources, D.U., J.O., S.D.V., and L.B.; supervision, J.O.;
visualization and writing, R.X. and J.O.; writing – review & editing, R.X., C.G.,
S.D.V., L.B., D.U., and J.O.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
S.D.V. is afﬁliated and has a ﬁnancial interest with The BioCollective, a com-
pany that provided the BioCollector, the collection kit used for at home stool
collection discussed in this manuscript.
Received: April 27, 2022
Revised: September 14, 2022
Accepted: December 30, 2022
Published: February 8, 2023
REFERENCES
1. Afari, N., and Buchwald, D. (2003). Chronic fatigue syndrome: a review. Am.
J. Psychiatry 160, 221–236. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.160.2.221.
2. Nacul, L., O’Boyle, S., Palla, L., Nacul, F.E., Mudie, K., Kingdon, C.C., Cliff,
J.M., Clark, T.G., Dockrell, H.M., and Lacerda, E.M. (2020). How Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) progresses: the
natural history of ME/CFS. Front. Neurol. 11, 826. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fneur.2020.00826.
3. Holgate, S.T., Komaroff, A.L., Mangan, D., and Wessely, S. (2011). Chronic
fatigue syndrome: understanding a complex illness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
12, 539–544. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3087.
4. Bested,
A.C.,
and
Marshall,
L.M.
(2015).
Review
of
myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue
Syndrome:
an
evidence-based
approach to diagnosis and management by clinicians. Rev. Environ.
Health 30, 223–249. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2015-0026.
5. Pheby, D.F.H., Araja, D., Berkis, U., Brenna, E., Cullinan, J., de Korwin,
J.D., Gitto, L., Hughes, D.A., Hunter, R.M., Trepel, D., et al. (2020). A liter-
ature review of GP knowledge and understanding of ME/CFS: A report
from the socioeconomic working group of the European network on ME/
CFS (EUROMENE). Medicina (Kaunas) 57, 7. https://doi.org/10.3390/me-
dicina57010007.
6. Naviaux, R.K., Naviaux, J.C., Li, K., Bright, A.T., Alaynick, W.A., Wang, L.,
Baxter, A., Nathan, N., Anderson, W., and Gordon, E. (2016). Metabolic
features of chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113,
E5472–E5480. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1607571113.
7. Navaneetharaja, N., Grifﬁths, V., Wileman, T., and Carding, S.R. (2016). A
role for the intestinal microbiota and virome in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)? J. Clin. Med. 5, E55. https://doi.
org/10.3390/jcm5060055.
8. Sheedy, J.R., Wettenhall, R.E.H., Scanlon, D., Gooley, P.R., Lewis, D.P.,
McGregor, N., Stapleton, D.I., Butt, H.L., and Meirleir, K.L.D.E. (2009).
Increased d-lactic Acid intestinal bacteria in patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome. Vivo Athens Greece 23, 621–628.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
284
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

9. Fre´ mont, M., Coomans, D., Massart, S., and De Meirleir, K. (2013). High-
throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing reveals alterations of intestinal mi-
crobiota in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients.
Anaerobe 22, 50–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.06.002.
10. Shukla, S.K., Cook, D., Meyer, J., Vernon, S.D., Le, T., Clevidence, D.,
Robertson, C.E., Schrodi, S.J., Yale, S., and Frank, D.N. (2015).
Changes in Gut and plasma microbiome following Exercise Challenge in
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS). PloS
One 10, e0145453. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145453.
11. Giloteaux, L., Goodrich, J.K., Walters, W.A., Levine, S.M., Ley, R.E., and
Hanson, M.R. (2016). Reduced diversity and altered composition of the gut
microbiome in individuals with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome. Microbiome 4, 30. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-016-0171-4.
12. Giloteaux, L., Hanson, M.R., and Keller, B.A. (2016). A pair of identical
twins discordant for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
differ in physiological parameters and gut microbiome composition. Am. J.
Case Rep. 17, 720–729. https://doi.org/10.12659/ajcr.900314.
13. Nagy-Szakal, D., Williams, B.L., Mishra, N., Che, X., Lee, B., Bateman, L.,
Klimas, N.G., Komaroff, A.L., Levine, S., Montoya, J.G., et al. (2017). Fecal
metagenomic proﬁles in subgroups of patients with myalgic encephalo-
myelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Microbiome 5, 44. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s40168-017-0261-y.
14. Visconti, A., Le Roy, C.I., Rosa, F., Rossi, N., Martin, T.C., Mohney, R.P.,
Li, W., de Rinaldis, E., Bell, J.T., Venter, J.C., et al. (2019). Interplay be-
tween the human gut microbiome and host metabolism. Nat. Commun.
10, 4505. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12476-z.
15. Wikoff, W.R., Anfora, A.T., Liu, J., Schultz, P.G., Lesley, S.A., Peters, E.C.,
and Siuzdak, G. (2009). Metabolomics analysis reveals large effects of gut
microﬂora on mammalian blood metabolites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
106, 3698–3703. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0812874106.
16. Turnbaugh, P.J., Ley, R.E., Mahowald, M.A., Magrini, V., Mardis, E.R., and
Gordon, J.I. (2006). An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased
capacity for energy harvest. Nature 444, 1027–1031. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature05414.
17. Hooper, L.V., Littman, D.R., and Macpherson, A.J. (2012). Interactions be-
tween the microbiota and the immune system. Science 336, 1268–1273.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1223490.
18. Nicholson, J.K., Holmes, E., Kinross, J., Burcelin, R., Gibson, G., Jia, W.,
and Pettersson, S. (2012). Host-gut microbiota metabolic interactions.
Science 336, 1262–1267. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1223813.
19. Valdes, A.M., Walter, J., Segal, E., and Spector, T.D. (2018). Role of the gut
microbiota in nutrition and health. BMJ 361, k2179. https://doi.org/10.
1136/bmj.k2179.
20. Correˆ a-Oliveira, R., Fachi, J.L., Vieira, A., Sato, F.T., and Vinolo, M.A.R.
(2016). Regulation of immune cell function by short-chain fatty acids.
Clin. Transl. Immunology 5, e73. https://doi.org/10.1038/cti.2016.17.
21. Fiorucci, S., Biagioli, M., Zampella, A., and Distrutti, E. (2018). Bile acids
activated receptors regulate innate immunity. Front. Immunol. 9, 1853.
https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2018.01853.
22. Sorgdrager, F.J.H., Naude´ , P.J.W., Kema, I.P., Nollen, E.A., and Deyn,
P.P.D. (2019). Tryptophan metabolism in inﬂammaging: from biomarker
to therapeutic target. Front. Immunol. 10, 2565. https://doi.org/10.3389/
ﬁmmu.2019.02565.
23. Bellono, N.W., Bayrer, J.R., Leitch, D.B., Castro, J., Zhang, C., O’Donnell,
T.A., Brierley, S.M., Ingraham, H.A., and Julius, D. (2017). Enterochromafﬁn
cells are gut chemosensors that couple to sensory neural pathways. Cell
170, 185–198.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.034.
24. Bian, X., Chi, L., Gao, B., Tu, P., Ru, H., and Lu, K. (2017). The artiﬁcial
sweetener acesulfame potassium affects the gut microbiome and body
weight gain in CD-1 mice. PLOS One 12, e0178426. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0178426.
25. Martin, A.M., Sun, E.W., Rogers, G.B., and Keating, D.J. (2019). The inﬂu-
ence of the gut microbiome on host metabolism through the regulation of
gut hormone release. Front. Physiol. 10, 428. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2019.00428.
26. Singh, K.S., Kumar, S., Mohanty, A.K., Grover, S., and Kaushik, J.K. (2018).
Mechanistic insights into the host-microbe interaction and pathogen
exclusion mediated by the Mucus-binding protein of Lactobacillus planta-
rum. Sci. Rep. 8, 14198. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32417-y.
27. Xu, L., Sun, L., Zhang, S., Wang, S., and Lu, M. (2019). High-resolution
proﬁling of gut bacterial communities in an invasive beetle using PacBio
SMRT sequencing system. Insects 10, E248. https://doi.org/10.3390/
insects10080248.
28. Noecker, C., McNally, C.P., Eng, A., and Borenstein, E. (2017). High-reso-
lution characterization of the human microbiome. Transl. Res. 179, 7–23.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trsl.2016.07.012.
29. McHardy, I.H., Goudarzi, M., Tong, M., Ruegger, P.M., Schwager, E.,
Weger, J.R., Graeber, T.G., Sonnenburg, J.L., Horvath, S., Huttenhower,
C., et al. (2013). Integrative analysis of the microbiome and metabolome
of the human intestinal mucosal surface reveals exquisite inter-relation-
ships. Microbiome 1, 17. https://doi.org/10.1186/2049-2618-1-17.
30. Lim, E.-J., Ahn, Y.-C., Jang, E.-S., Lee, S.-W., Lee, S.-H., and Son, C.-G.
(2020). Systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of chronic
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME). J. Transl. Med.
18, 100. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-020-02269-0.
31. Shikova,E.,Reshkova,V.,Kumanova,A.,Raleva,S.,Alexandrova,D.,Capo,
N., and Murovska, M.; European Network on ME/CFS (EUROMENE) (2020).
Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and human herpesvirus-6 infections in
patients with myalgic fncephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Med.
Virol. 92, 3682–3688. https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25744.
32. van Campen, C.L.M.C., Verheugt, F.W.A., Rowe, P.C., and Visser, F.C.
(2020). Cerebral blood ﬂow is reduced in ME/CFS during head-up tilt
testing even in the absence of hypotension or tachycardia: a quantitative,
controlled study using Doppler echography. Clin. Neurophysiol. Pract. 5,
50–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnp.2020.01.003.
33. De Becker, P., McGregor, N., and De Meirleir, K. (2001). A deﬁnition-based
analysis of symptoms in a large cohort of patients with chronic fatigue syn-
drome. J. Intern. Med. 250, 234–240. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-
2796.2001.00890.x.
34. Roma, M., Marden, C.L., Flaherty, M.A.K., Jasion, S.E., Cranston, E.M., and
Rowe, P.C. (2019). Impaired health-related quality of life in adolescent
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: the impact of core
symptoms. Front. Pediatr. 7, 26. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2019.00026.
35. Larson, P.J., Oh, J., Robison, J., Grady, J., and Kuchel, G. (2020). 1206.
Association of aging, frailty and place of residence with skin, oral and
gut microbiome characteristics and pathogenicity reservoirs. Open
Forum Infect. Dis. 7, S625. https://doi.org/10.1093/oﬁd/ofaa439.1391.
36. Larson, P.J., Zhou, W., Santiago, A., Driscoll, S., Fleming, E., Voigt, A.Y.,
Chun, O.K., Grady, J.J., Kuchel, G.A., Robison, J.T., et al. (2022).
Associations of the skin, oral and gut microbiome with aging, frailty and
infection risk reservoirs in older adults. Nat. Aging 2, 941–955. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00287-9.
37. Mosca,A., Leclerc, M., and Hugot, J.P. (2016). Gut microbiota diversity and
human diseases: should we reintroduce key predators in our ecosystem?
Front. Microbiol. 7, 455. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00455.
38. Haahtela, T. (2019). A biodiversity hypothesis. Allergy 74, 1445–1456.
https://doi.org/10.1111/all.13763.
39. Behary, J., Amorim, N., Jiang, X.-T., Raposo, A., Gong, L., McGovern, E.,
Ibrahim, R., Chu, F., Stephens, C., Jebeili, H., et al. (2021). Gut microbiota
impact on the peripheral immune response in non-alcoholic fatty liver dis-
ease related hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat. Commun. 12, 187. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-020-20422-7.
40. Mun˜ iz Pedrogo, D.A., Chen, J., Hillmann, B., Jeraldo, P., Al-Ghalith, G.,
Taneja, V., Davis, J.M., Knights, D., Nelson, H., Faubion, W.A., et al.
(2019). An increased abundance of Clostridiaceae characterizes arthritis
in inﬂammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis: A cross-sectional
study. Inﬂam. Bowel Dis. 25, 902–913. https://doi.org/10.1093/ibd/izy318.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
285

41. Emiola, A., and Oh, J. (2018). High throughput in situ metagenomic mea-
surement of bacterial replication at ultra-low sequencing coverage. Nat.
Commun. 9, 4956. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07240-8.
42. Canani, R.B., Costanzo, M.D., Leone, L., Pedata, M., Meli, R., and
Calignano, A. (2011). Potential beneﬁcial effects of butyrate in intestinal
and extraintestinal diseases. World J. Gastroenterol. 17, 1519–1528.
https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v17.i12.1519.
43. Ferrer-Pico´ n, E., Dotti, I., Corraliza, A.M., Mayorgas, A., Esteller, M.,
Perales, J.C., Ricart, E., Masamunt, M.C., Carrasco, A., Trista´ n, E., et al.
(2020). Intestinal inﬂammation modulates the epithelial response to buty-
rate in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease. Inﬂam. Bowel Dis. 26,
43–55. https://doi.org/10.1093/ibd/izz119.
44. Hosseini, E., Grootaert, C., Verstraete, W., and Van de Wiele, T. (2011).
Propionate as a health-promoting microbial metabolite in the human gut.
Nutr. Rev. 69, 245–258. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-4887.2011.00388.x.
45. Taleb, S. (2019). Tryptophan dietary impacts gut barrier and metabolic dis-
eases.Front.Immunol.10,2113.https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2019.02113.
46. Go, E.K., Jung, K.J., Kim, J.Y., Yu, B.P., and Chung, H.Y. (2005). Betaine
suppresses proinﬂammatory signaling during aging: the involvement of
nuclear factor-kB via nuclear factor-inducing kinase/IkB kinase and
mitogen-activated protein kinases. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 60,
1252–1264. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/60.10.1252.
47. Zhao, G., He, F., Wu, C., Li, P., Li, N., Deng, J., Zhu, G., Ren, W., and Peng,
Y. (2018). Betaine in inﬂammation: mechanistic aspects and applications.
Front. Immunol. 9, 1070. https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2018.01070.
48. Germain, A., Barupal, D.K., Levine, S.M., and Hanson, M.R. (2020).
Comprehensive circulatory metabolomics in ME/CFS reveals disrupted
metabolism of acyl lipids and steroids. Metabolites 10, 34. https://doi.
org/10.3390/metabo10010034.
49. Nkiliza, A., Parks, M., Cseresznye, A., Oberlin, S., Evans, J.E., Darcey, T.,
Aenlle, K., Niedospial, D., Mullan, M., Crawford, F., et al. (2021). Sex-spe-
ciﬁc plasma lipid proﬁles of ME/CFS patients and their association with
pain, fatigue, and cognitive symptoms. J. Transl. Med. 19, 370. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12967-021-03035-6.
50. Noda, M., Ifuku, M., Hossain, Md.S., and Katafuchi, T. (2018). Glial activation
and expression of the serotonin transporter in chronic fatigue syndrome.
Front. Psychiatry 9, 589. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00589.
51. Guo, P., Zhang, K., Ma, X., and He, P. (2020). Clostridium species as pro-
biotics: potentials and challenges. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 11, 24. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s40104-019-0402-1.
52. Brkic, S., Tomic, S., Maric, D., Novakov Mikic, A.N., and Turkulov, V.
(2010). Lipid peroxidation is elevated in female patients with chronic fa-
tigue syndrome. Med. Sci. Monit. 16, CR628–CR632.
53. Tomic, S., Brkic, S., Maric, D., and Mikic, A.N. (2012). Lipid and protein
oxidation in female patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Arch. Med.
Sci. 8, 886–891. https://doi.org/10.5114/aoms.2012.31620.
54. Ruiz-Nu´ n˜ ez, B., Tarasse, R., Vogelaar, E.F., Janneke Dijck-Brouwer, D.A.,
and Muskiet, F.A.J. (2018). Higher prevalence of ‘‘low T3 syndrome’’ in pa-
tients with chronic fatigue syndrome: a case–control study. Front.
Endocrinol. 9, 97. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2018.00097.
55. Flores, S., Brown, A., Adeoye, S., Jason, L., and Evans, M. (2013).
Examining the impact of obesity on individuals with CFS. Workplace
Health Saf. 61, 299–307. https://doi.org/10.3928/21650799-20130617-12.
56. Germain, A.,Ruppert, D., Levine,S.M., andHanson,M.R.(2018).Prospective
biomarkersfromplasmametabolomicsofmyalgicencephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome implicate redox imbalance in disease symptomatology.
Metabolites 8, 90. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo8040090.
57. Lakhan, S.E., and Kirchgessner, A. (2010). Gut inﬂammation in chronic fa-
tigue syndrome. Nutr. Metab. (Lond) 7, 79. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-
7075-7-79.
58. Jackson, M.L., and Bruck, D. (2012). Sleep abnormalities in chronic fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: a review. J. Clin. Sleep Med. 8,
719–728. https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.2276.
59. Boneva, R.S., Lin, J.-M.S., Wieser, F., Nater, U.M., Ditzen, B., Taylor, R.N.,
and Unger, E.R. (2019). Endometriosis as a comorbid condition in chronic
fatigue syndrome (CFS): secondary analysis of data from a CFS case-con-
trol study. Front. Pediatr. 7, 195. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2019.00195.
60. Pataky, M.W., Young, W.F., and Nair, K.S. (2021). Hormonal and meta-
bolic changes of aging and the inﬂuence of lifestyle modiﬁcations. Mayo
Clin. Proc. 96, 788–814. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.07.033.
61. Jura, M., and Kozak, L.P. (2016). Obesity and related consequences to
ageing. Age (Dordr) 38, 23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11357-016-9884-3.
62. Natelson, B.H. (2019). Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syn-
drome and ﬁbromyalgia: deﬁnitions, similarities and differences. Clin.
Ther. 41, 612–618. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2018.12.016.
63. Harris, S., Gilbert, M., Beasant, L., Linney, C., Broughton, J., and Crawley,
E. (2017). A qualitative investigation of eating difﬁculties in adolescents with
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. Clin. Child Psychol.
Psychiatry 22, 128–139. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359104516646813.
64. Donohoe, D.R., Garge, N., Zhang, X., Sun, W., O’Connell, T.M., Bunger,
M.K., and Bultman, S.J. (2011). The microbiome and butyrate regulate en-
ergy metabolism and autophagy in the mammalian colon. Cell Metab. 13,
517–526. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2011.02.018.
65. M€uller, M., Herna´ ndez, M.A.G., Goossens, G.H., Reijnders, D., Holst, J.J.,
Jocken, J.W.E., van Eijk, H., Canfora, E.E., and Blaak, E.E. (2019).
Circulating but not faecal short-chain fatty acids are related to insulin
sensitivity, lipolysis and GLP-1 concentrations in humans. Sci. Rep. 9,
12515. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-48775-0.
66. Guo, C., Che, X., Briese, T., Allicock, O., Yates, R.A., Cheng, A., Ranjan, A.,
March, D., Hornig, M., Komaroff, A.L., et al. (2021). Deﬁcient butyrate-pro-
ducing capacity in the gut microbiome of myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome patients is associated with fatigue symptoms.
Preprint at medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.27.21265575.
67. Proal, A., and Marshall, T. (2018). Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome in the era of the human microbiome: persistent pathogens drive
chronic symptoms by interfering with host metabolism, gene expression,
and
immunity.
Front.
Pediatr.
6,
373.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.
2018.00373.
68. Lupo, G.F.D., Rocchetti, G., Lucini, L., Lorusso, L., Manara, E., Bertelli, M.,
Puglisi, E., and Capelli, E. (2021). Potential role of microbiome in chronic
fatigue syndrome/myalgic Encephalomyelits (CFS/ME). Sci. Rep. 11,
7043. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-86425-6.
69. Sanchez-Morate, E., Gimeno-Mallench, L., Stromsnes, K., Sanz-Ros, J.,
Roma´ n-Domı´nguez, A., Parejo-Pedrajas, S., Ingle´ s, M., Olaso, G.,
Gambini, J., and Mas-Bargues, C. (2020). Relationship between diet, mi-
crobiota, and healthy aging. Biomedicines 8, 287. https://doi.org/10.
3390/biomedicines8080287.
70. Fromentin,
S.,
Forslund,
S.K.,
Chechi,
K.,
Aron-Wisnewsky,
J.,
Chakaroun, R., Nielsen, T., Tremaroli, V., Ji, B., Prifti, E., Myridakis, A.,
et al. (2022). Microbiome and metabolome features of the cardiometabolic
disease spectrum. Nat. Med. 28, 303–314. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41591-022-01688-4.
71. Karhan, E., Gunter, C.L., Ravanmehr, V., Horne, M., Kozhaya, L., Renzullo,
S., Placek, L., George, J., Robinson, P.N., Vernon, S.D., et al. (2019).
Perturbation of effector and regulatory T cell subsets in myalgic encepha-
lomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Preprint at bioRxiv. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.887505.
72. Russell, L., Broderick, G., Taylor, R., Fernandes, H., Harvey, J., Barnes, Z.,
Smylie, A., Collado, F., Balbin, E.G., Katz, B.Z., et al. (2016). Illness pro-
gression in chronic fatigue syndrome: a shifting immune baseline. BMC
Immunol. 17, 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12865-016-0142-3.
73. Bar, N., Korem, T., Weissbrod, O., Zeevi, D., Rothschild, D., Leviatan, S.,
Kosower, N., Lotan-Pompan, M., Weinberger, A., Le Roy, C.I., et al. (2020).
A reference map of potential determinants for the human serum metabo-
lome. Nature 588, 135–140. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2896-2.
74. Yancey, J.R., and Thomas, S.M. (2012). Chronic fatigue syndrome: diag-
nosis and treatment. Am. Fam. Phys. 86, 741–746.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
286
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023

75. Hickie, I., Davenport, T., Wakeﬁeld, D., Vollmer-Conna, U., Cameron, B.,
Vernon, S.D., Reeves, W.C., and Lloyd, A.; Dubbo Infection Outcomes
Study Group (2006). Post-infective and chronic fatigue syndromes precip-
itated by viral and non-viral pathogens: prospective cohort study. BMJ
333, 575. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38933.585764.AE.
76. Pendergrast, T., Brown, A., Sunnquist, M., Jantke, R., Newton, J.L.,
Strand, E.B., and Jason, L.A. (2016). Housebound versus nonhousebound
patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis and chronic fatigue syndrome.
Chronic Illn. 12, 292–307. https://doi.org/10.1177/1742395316644770.
77. Komaroff, A.L., and Bateman, L. (2021). Will COVID-19 lead to myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome? Front. Med. 7, 1132.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.606824.
78. Beghini, F., McIver, L.J., Blanco-Mı´guez, A., Dubois, L., Asnicar, F.,
Maharjan, S., Mailyan, A., Manghi, P., Scholz, M., Thomas, A.M., et al.
(2021). Integrating taxonomic, functional, and strain-level proﬁling of
diverse microbial communities with bioBakery 3. eLife 10, e65088.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.65088.
79. Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S.L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment
with
Bowtie
2. Nat
Methods
9,
357–359.
https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.1923.
80. Edgar, R.C. (2010). Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than
BLAST. Bioinformatics 26, 2460–2461. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinfor-
matics/btq461.
81. Fukuda, K., Straus, S.E., Hickie, I., Sharpe, M.C., Dobbins, J.G., and
Komaroff, A. (1994). The chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive
approach to its deﬁnition and study. International chronic fatigue syn-
drome study group. Ann. Intern. Med. 121, 953–959. https://doi.org/10.
7326/0003-4819-121-12-199412150-00009.
82. Carruthers, B.M. (2007). Deﬁnitions and aetiology of myalgic encephalo-
myelitis: how the Canadian consensus clinical deﬁnition of myalgic
encephalomyelitis works. J. Clin. Pathol. 60, 117–119. https://doi.org/
10.1136/jcp.2006.042754.
83. Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome; Board on the Health of Select Populations;
Institute of Medicine (2015). Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome: Redeﬁning an Illness (National Academies Press).
84. Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15,
550. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8.
85. Garza, D.R., van Verk, M.C., Huynen, M.A., and Dutilh, B.E. (2018).
Towards predicting the environmental metabolome from metagenomics
with a mechanistic model. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 456–460. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41564-018-0124-8.
86. Mallick, H., Rahnavard, A., McIver, L.J., Ma, S., Zhang, Y., Nguyen, L.H.,
Tickle, T.L., Weingart, G., Ren, B., Schwager, E.H., et al. (2021).
Multivariable association discovery in population-scale meta-omics
studies. PLoS Comput. Biol. 17, e1009442. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pcbi.1009442.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287, February 8, 2023
287

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Biological samples
Stool samples from ME/CFS
patients and healthy donors
This study
N/A
Plasma samples from ME/CFS
patients and healthy donors
This study
N/A
Critical commercial assays
QIAamp 96 DNA QIAcube HT Kit
QIAGEN
#51331
BioCollector fecal collection kit
The BioCollective,
Denver, CO
https://www.thebiocollective.
com/products-services
OMNIgen GUT tube
DNA Genotek
OMR-200
Deposited data
Metagenomics sequencing raw data
This study
NCBI-SRA: Bioproject PRJNA878603
Software and algorithms
R version (v4.0.4)
N/A
N/A
Python (v3.10.4)
N/A
N/A
scythe (v0.994)
Buffalo, 2014 (software)
https://github.com/vsbuffalo/scythe
sickle (v1.33)
Joshi and Fass,
2011 (software)
https://github.com/najoshi/sickle
MetaPhlAn3
Beghini et al.78
https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/
metaphlan/
Bowtie2 (v2.3.1)
Langmead and
Salzberg79
https://github.com/BenLangmead/
bowtie2
GRiD (v1.3)
Emiola et al.41
https://github.com/ohlab/GRiD
USEARCH (v8.0.1517)
Edgar80
https://www.drive5.com/usearch/
dplyr_1.0.5
R package
https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/index.html
microbiome_1.12.0
R package
https://microbiome.github.io/tutorials/
phyloseq_1.34.0
R package
https://joey711.github.io/phyloseq/
maaslin2_1.8.0
R package
https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/
maaslin/
globaltest_5.44.0
R package
https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/
release/bioc/html/globaltest.html
bcdstats_0.0.0.9005
R package
https://github.com/bcdudek/bcdstats/
lme4_1.1-29
R package
https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/lme4/index.html
vegan_2.6-2
R package
https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/vegan/index.html
deseq2_v1.18.1
R package
https://bioconductor.org/
packages/release/bioc/html/
DESeq2.html
scipy_1.8.0
python package
https://scipy.org/
jupyter_4.9.2
python package
https://jupyter.org/
numpy_1.22.3
python package
https://numpy.org/
pandas_1.4.2
python package
https://pandas.pydata.org/
scikit-learn_1.0.2
python package
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
index.html
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
e1
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287.e1–e5, February 8, 2023

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the lead contact, Julia Oh (julia.oh@jax.org).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
Metagenomics data have been deposited at PRJNA878603 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession
numbers are listed in the key resources table.
All original code has been deposited at https://github.com/ohlab/MECFS_2021 and is publicly available as of the date of
publication.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Cohort and study design
All subjects were recruited at Bateman Horne Center, Salt Lake City, UT, based on who met the 1994 CDC Fukuda81 and/or Canadian
consensus criteria for ME/CFS.82 Healthy controls were frequency-matched to cases on age, sex, race/ethnicity, geographic/clinical
site, and season of sampling. Patients or controls taking antibiotics or who had any infections in the prior one month, or who were
taking any immunomodulatory medications were excluded from the study. The study was approved by The Jackson Laboratory IRB
(Study number 17-JGM-13) and written informed consent and verbal assent when appropriate were obtained from all participants in
this study. We enrolled a total of 149 ME/CFS patients (of which 74 had been diagnosed with ME/CFS <4 years before recruitment
and 75 had been diagnosed with ME/CFS >10 years before recruitment) and 79 healthy controls. Among them, 107 patients and 59
healthy controls were followed one year after the recruitment as timepoint 2. Subject characteristics are shown in Table S1.
Participants
149 ME/CFS patients who had been seen at Bateman Horne Center (Salt Lake City, UT) for routine clinical care between February
2018 and September 2019 and 79 matched HCs were recruited for the study. The 149 MECFS subjects included 74 sick with ME/CFS
for <4 years and 75 sick for greater than 10 years. The age range of ME/CFS participants and HCs was 18-65 years at the time of
informed consent. HCs were matched with <4 ME/CFS participants by age (± 5 years), gender and ethnicity. Enrolled ME/CFS par-
ticipants were required to fulﬁll the International Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Study Group research criteria,81 the Canadian
Consensus Criteria,82 and the IOM clinical diagnostic criteria.83 HCs were recruited from the Salt Lake City metropolitan area using
advertisements posted on social media, the clinic webpage or by phone contact with a volunteer pool from previous studies. HCs
were considered generally healthy and between 18 to 65 years of age. HCs were excluded if they fulﬁlled ME/CFS diagnostic criteria
or had a history of illness, had a BMI>40 or had been treated with long-term (longer than 2 weeks) antiviral medication or immune
modulatory medications within the past 6 months or had been treated with short-term (less than 2 weeks) antiviral or antibiotic medi-
cation within the past 30 days.
METHOD DETAILS
Clinical metadata collection and preprocess
Clinical symptoms and baseline health status was assessed on the day of physical examination and biological sample collection
from both case and control subjects. For each participant, we collected demographic information (including age, gender, diet,
race, family, work, and education), medical histories, and three questionnaires regarding the general physical and mental health
condition (RAND-36 form), sleep quality (PSQI form) and gastrointestinal health (GSRS form). The summary of analyzed clinical
features and questionnaires are shown in Table S2. Age and diet were analyzed and discussed as potential confounders
(Figures S1 and S4). Medical histories were simpliﬁed into binary features (0 - no records, 1, had/having the disease) and further
constructed naı¨ve Bayesian classiﬁcation models. Every questionnaire was transformed into a 0–100 scale to facilitate combina-
tion and comparison wherein a score of 100 is equivalent to maximum disability or severity and a score of zero is equivalent to no
disability or disturbance.
Plasma sample collection and preparation
Healthy and patient blood samples were obtained from Bateman Horne Center, Salt Lake City, UT and approved by JAX IRB. One
4 mL lavender top tube (K2EDTA) was collected, and tube slowly inverted 8-10 times immediately after collection. Blood was centri-
fuged within 30 minutes of collection at 1000 x g with low brake for 10 minutes. 250 uL of plasma was transferred into three 1 mL
cryovial tubes, and tubes were frozen upright at -80C. Frozen plasma samples were batch shipped overnight on dry ice to The Jack-
son Laboratory, Farmington, CT, and stored at -80C.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287.e1–e5, February 8, 2023
e2

Plasma untargeted metabolome by UPLC-MS/MS
Plasma samples were sent to Metabolon platform and processed by Ultrahigh Performance Liquid Chromatography-Tandem
Mass Spectroscopy (UPLC-MS/MS) following the CFS cohort pipeline. In brief, samples were prepared using the automated
MicroLab STAR system from Hamilton Company. The extract was divided into ﬁve fractions: two for analysis by two separate
reverse phases (RP)/UPLC-MS/MS methods with positive ion mode electrospray ionization (ESI), one for analysis by RP/UPLC-
MS/MS with negative ion mode ESI, one for analysis by HILIC/UPLC-MS/MS with negative ion mode ESI, and one sample was
reserved for backup. QA/QC were analyzed with several types of controls were analyzed including a pooled matrix sample gener-
ated by taking a small volume of each experimental sample (or alternatively, use of a pool of well-characterized human plasma),
extracted water samples, and a cocktail of QC standards that were carefully chosen not to interfere with the measurement of
endogenous compounds were spiked into every analyzed sample, allowed instrument performance monitoring, and aided chro-
matographic alignment. Compounds were identiﬁed by comparison to Metabolon library entries of puriﬁed standards or recurrent
unknown entities. The output raw data included the annotations and the value of peaks quantiﬁed using area-under-the-curve for
metabolites.
Fecal sample collection and DNA extraction
Stool was self-collected at home by volunteers using a BioCollector fecal collection kit (The BioCollective, Denver, CO) according to
manufacturer instructions for preservation for sequencing prior to sending the sample in a provided Styrofoam container with a cold
pack. Upon receipt, stool and OMNIgene samples were immediately aliquoted and frozen at –80C for storage. Prior to aliquoting,
OMNIgene stool samples were homogenized by vortexing (using the metal bead inside the OMNIgene tube), then divided into 2 mi-
crofuge tubes, one with 100mL aliquot and one with 1mL. DNA was extracted using the Qiagen (Germantown, MD, USA) QIAamp 96
DNA QIAcube HT Kit with the following modiﬁcations: enzymatic digestion with 50mg of lysozyme (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 5U
each of lysostaphin and mutanolysin (Sigma) for 30 min at 37 C followed by bead-beating with 50 mg 0.1 mm of zirconium beads for
6 min on the Tissuelyzer II (Qiagen) prior to loading onto the Qiacube HT. DNA concentration was measured using the Qubit high
sensitivity dsDNA kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
Metagenomic shotgun sequencing
Approximately 50mL of thawed OMNIgene preserved stool sample was added to a microfuge tube containing 350 mL Tissue and Cell
lysis buffer and 100 mg 0.1 mm zirconia beads. Metagenomic DNA was extracted using the QiaAmp 96 DNA QiaCube HT kit (Qiagen,
5331) with the following modiﬁcations: each sample was digested with 5mL of Lysozyme (10 mg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, L6876), 1mL
Lysostaphin (5000U/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, L9043) and 1mL oh Mutanolysin (5000U/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, M9901) were added to each
sample to digest at 37C for 30 minutes prior to the bead-beating in the in the TissueLyser II (Qiagen) for 2 x 3 minutes at 30 Hz.
Each sample was centrifuged for 1 minute at 15000 x g prior to loading 200ml into an S-block (Qiagen, 19585) Negative (environ-
mental) controls and positive (in-house mock community of 26 unique species) controls were extracted and sequenced with each
extraction and library preparation batch to ensure sample integrity.
Sequencing adapters and low-quality bases were removed from the metagenomic reads using scythe (v0.994) and sickle (v1.33),
respectively, with default parameters. Host reads were removed by mapping all sequencing reads to the hg19 human reference
genome using Bowtie2 (v2.3.1), under ‘very-sensitive’ mode. Unmapped reads (i.e., microbial reads) were used to estimate the rela-
tive abundance proﬁles of the microbial species in the samples using MetaPhlAn3.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Metabolome enrichment study
From the raw data (peaks area-under-the-curve), we ﬁrst kept metabolic features present in >50% of the samples for further analysis,
and missing values were imputed with the minimum value. To remove batch variability, for each metabolite, the values in the exper-
imental samples are divided by the median of those samples in each instrument batch, giving each batch and thus the metabolite a
median of one. For each metabolite, the minimum value across all batches in the median scaled data is imputed for the missing
values. We ﬁrst applied qualitative enrichment analysis (Over Representation Analysis ORA) in two patient cohorts (short-term vs.
control, and long-term vs. control). We conducted Wilcoxon rank-sum test on all metabolites and counted the signiﬁcantly differential
metabolites in every sub pathway. Fisher test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment was followed to identify the distributions of the
over-representated genes in the pathway. For every sub pathway, we also applied a global quantitative enrichment analysis with
linear globaltest in R to compute the association between a group of metabolites from that pathway and the duration of disease (con-
trol, short-term, and long-term).
Taxonomic and KEGG gene proﬁling of metagenomics samples
Taxonomic compositions were proﬁled using Metaphlan3.078 and the species whose average relative abundance > 1e-5 were kept
for further analysis, giving 384 species. The gene proﬁling was computed with USEARCH(v8.0.15)80 (with parameters: evalue 1e-9,
accel 0.5, top_hits_only) to KEGG Orthology (KO) database v54, giving a total of 9452 annotated KEGG genes. The reads count pro-
ﬁle was normalized by DeSeq2 in R.84 Metagenomics read depth was considered as potential confounders and analyzed as below
(see confounder analysis).
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
e3
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287.e1–e5, February 8, 2023

Microbial community structure analysis
The overall community structures was examined by Correspondence Analysis (PCoA) and PERMANOVA were performed in R with
the adonis function in the R package vegan to analyze the partitioning of variation giving potential confounders including age and
gender. The heterogeneity index (Inter-individual divergence) and community indexes including chao1, evenness(evar), rarity(lo-
w_abundance) and inequality(dominance_gini) were computed by R package microbiome. The species replication rate was pre-
dicted using GRiD with default settings.41 Metagenomics read depth was considered as potential confounders and analyzed as
below (see confounder analysis).
Gut metabolic status prediction
Here, we adapted from the MAMBO85 pipeline and predicted 224 metabolites status of the microbial community in our cohort. We
ﬁrst constrained the Genome-scale metabolic models (GSMMs) community of all 384 microbes identiﬁed in the species proﬁle. We
started with the same gut metabolic environment for all samples giving randomized 224 metabolites initialization and using a Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) to sample metabolites. In each step, we sampled one metabolite and used the Flux balance analysis to
model reaction ﬂux with a slight change of the target metabolites and accepted the step only if the probed growth rate is correlated
with the species relative abundance. Samples were ﬁrst subjected to 100,000 search steps, and 100,000 steps were subsequently
added until a high Pearson correlation (r > 0.6) with the target metagenomic abundance proﬁle was achieved. Finally, the 10% time
points with the highest Pearson correlation scores between the biomass proﬁle and the metagenomic abundance proﬁle were aver-
aged, yielding a robustly predicted metabolome.
Multi-‘omics classiﬁcation models
To identify phenotypic, metagenomic, and metabolomic markers of the onset(control/patient) of the disease, we constructed a naı¨ve
Bayesian classiﬁcation model with medical history records and three individual classiﬁcation models based on the species abun-
dance, normalized KEGG gene abundance, and normalized metabolite proﬁle and one combination multi-omics model with all
top ten features collected from each model. We also tested four different classiﬁcation methods, LASSO logistic regression, Support
vector machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), and Gradient Boosting (GDBT). The same Multi-‘omics classiﬁcation model system was
also applied to classify the duration(control/short-term/long-term) of the disease.
All analyses were carried out using the Python package ‘scikit-learn’. Normalized KEGG gene and normalized plasma metab-
olome were standardized (by centering to mean 0 and dividing by the standard deviation of each feature) before ﬁtting into the
models. The models were optimized by ﬁve-fold RandomizedSearchCV to probe the best parameters giving lists of candidates.
Models were then validated by 10-fold stratiﬁed cross-validation testing (we resampled dataset partitions 10 times). In each test,
the accuracy of the model was examined using ROC (area under the curve). The comparison among models showed that GDBT
outcompeted the rest three and reached the best performance. In the Gradient boosting model, two steps were carried out. In the
ﬁrst step, the model was constructed using each of the three proﬁles (species abundance, KEGG gene abundance, and metabolite
proﬁle) individually to compute the feature importance as the feature contributions to the classiﬁcation. In the second step, the
collective model was constructed using a combination of top ten important features determined from the species relative abun-
dance model + top ten important features determined from the KEGG gene model + top ten important features determined from
the plasma metabolite model.
Confounder analysis
Confounder analysis was done by R package MaAsLin2.86 The demographic features (including age, gender, ethnicity, and
race), diet records, antivirals, antifungals, antibiotics, and probiotics medications, and self-reported IBS scores are considered
potential confounders. We ran general linear tests to determine the multivariable association between each meta feature and
each microbial and metabolomic features (including microbiome diversity indexes, specie abundance, KEGG gene abundance,
plasma metabolites). The three formulas for ﬁxed effects: 1) Demographic model: expr  age + gender + ethnic + race + IBS; 2)
Diet model: expr  diet_meat + diet_sugar + diet_veg + diet_grains + diet_fruit; 3) expr  antifungals + antibiotics + probiotics +
antivirals. The expr in these formulas have combined microbiome diversity indexes and 3 ‘omics in the model training and
covered all features in the differentiation analysis. Metagenomics reads depth was also considered as another confounder.
The general linear tests were computed with all microbiome features by the formula: reads_count  microbiome diversity
indexes + specie abundance + KEGG gene abundance. No microbiome features were signiﬁcantly selected by the model.
All signiﬁcant features identiﬁed by the association models are shared in Table S7. The codes and run log ﬁles are shared
on our GitHub.
Interaction study and targeted pathway analysis
We computed the Spearman correlation for the butyrate pathway genes (N = 113) and butyrate producers (N = 18) with metabolites
(N = 1278) along with the fold change of the elements. P-value was correlated by Holm’s method.
Statistical Analysis
The dimensionality reduction analysis was conducted by Principal Correspondence Analysis (PCoA) using sklearn.mani-
fold.MDS function for both gut microbiome Bray-Curtis dissimilarity distance matrix and normalized plasma metabolome proﬁle.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287.e1–e5, February 8, 2023
e4

The statistically signiﬁcant differences among independent groups (healthy/patient/short-term/long-term) were determined by
nonparametric test using pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test two-sided with Bonferroni correction. The average abundances of
each species, genes and metabolites were determined to be signiﬁcantly elevated or depleted in short-term or long-term
groups by pairwise nonparametric comparison using Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Bonferroni correction over N=384 species,
N=9652 genes and N=1278 metabolites, respectively. Chi-squared test was used to compare the infection frequencies between
healthy and patient groups. The correlation analysis was done by Spearman’s rank correlation, and the p-values were corre-
lated
by
Holm’s
method.
P
value
annotations:
ns:
p
>
0.05,
*:
0.01
<
p
<=
0.05,
**:
0.001
<
p
<=
0.01,
***: 1e-04 < p <= 0.001, ****: p <= 1e-04.
ll
Clinical and Translational Report
e5
Cell Host & Microbe 31, 273–287.e1–e5, February 8, 2023
