Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Deep phenotyping of post-infectious myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
A list of authors and their afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper
Post-infectious myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (PI-ME/
CFS) is a disabling disorder, yet the clinical phenotype is poorly deﬁned, the
pathophysiology is unknown, and no disease-modifying treatments are avail-
able. We used rigorous criteria to recruit PI-ME/CFS participants with matched
controls to conduct deep phenotyping. Among the many physical and cog-
nitive complaints, one deﬁning feature of PI-ME/CFS was an alteration of effort
preference, rather than physical or central fatigue, due to dysfunction of
integrative brain regions potentially associated with central catechol pathway
dysregulation, with consequences on autonomic functioning and physical
conditioning. Immune proﬁling suggested chronic antigenic stimulation with
increase in naïve and decrease in switched memory B-cells. Alterations in gene
expression proﬁles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and metabolic
pathways were consistent with cellular phenotypic studies and demonstrated
differences according to sex. Together these clinical abnormalities and bio-
marker differences provide unique insight into the underlying pathophysiol-
ogy of PI-ME/CFS, which may guide future intervention.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is the
commonly used term to describe a disorder of persistent and disabling
fatigue, exercise intolerance, malaise, cognitive complaints, and phy-
sical symptoms with signiﬁcant socioeconomic consequences. The
physiological mechanism responsible for the persistence of fatigue
and related symptoms has yet to be determined. Immunologic1,
bioenergetic2–5, and physiologic6 alterations have been reported.
However, many of these ﬁndings have been inconsistent and both their
clinical relevance and relation to each other are unclear. Hence, there
are currently no effective disease modifying treatments for ME/CFS,
and even developing and testing of potential new treatments is ham-
pered by difﬁculty in deﬁning cases or tracking response through
symptoms or biomarkers.
A major obstacle to rigorous ME/CFS research is case assessment
due to the absence of a diagnostic biomarker. Over 20 different
diagnostic criteria underscore the difﬁculty in deﬁning the clinical
symptom content of ME/CFS7. The usual symptoms are non-speciﬁc
and overlap with other diseases, hence misattribution is frequent and
ME/CFS is typically a diagnosis of exclusion8. ME/CFS often occurs
following an acute infection, designated post-infectious-ME/CFS
(PI-ME/CFS), with an estimated incidence of 10–12% after certain
infections9,10.The most well-known association of PI-ME/CFS has been
with the Epstein-Barr Virus11 but as the full extent of the sequelae of the
COVID-19 pandemic are better understood, SARS-CoV-2 may become
an even stronger correlate12.
In 2016, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) launched an
initiative to study ME/CFS. The NIH Division of Intramural Research
developed an exploratory clinical research program to perform deep
phenotyping on a cohort of PI-ME/CFS participants and healthy
volunteers (HV) as controls. Prior to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, this
study recruited a cohort of well-characterized PI-ME/CFS patients and
applied modern broad and deep scientiﬁc measures to describe their
biophenotype compared to HVs. The aim was to identify relevant
group differences that could generate new hypotheses about the
pathogenesis of PI-ME/CFS and provide direction for future research.
Over 75 scientists and clinicians across 15 of the 27 institutes that
comprise the NIH contributed to this multi-disciplinary work. Impor-
tantly, we developed rigorous inclusion criteria which comprised
detailed medical and psychological evaluations to minimize diagnostic
misattribution. A relatively homogenous population was recruited in
Received: 24 June 2023
Accepted: 16 January 2024
Check for updates
e-mail: Avindra.nath@nih.gov
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

whom symptoms were initiated after infection. This study aimed to
investigate the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. The par-
ticipants underwent a multi-dimensional evaluation that included a
wide range of physiological measures, physical and cognitive perfor-
mance testing, and biochemical, microbiological, and immunological
assays of blood, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, muscle, and stool. Measurement
techniques were developed to query issues such as physical capacity,
effort preference, and deconditioning that may confound the results.
Multi-omic measurements of gene expression, proteins, metabolites,
and lipids were performed in parallel on collected samples. This report
summarizes and contextualizes the main ﬁndings arising from
this work.
Results
Data are reported in the following formats: (HV mean ± standard
deviation versus PI-ME/CFS mean ± standard deviation, p-value). Odds
ratio (OR) and relative odds ratio (ROR) are reported as: HV:PI-ME/CFS
ratio [95% conﬁdence interval]. Additional analysis and a glossary of
abbreviations are provided in the Supplementary Information.
Case ascertainment
Study recruitment occurred between December 2016 and February
2020 (Fig. 1a). Of 484 ME/CFS inquiries, 217 individuals underwent
detailed case reviews entailing telephone interviews and medical
record review (Supplementary Data S2). Of these, 27 underwent in-
person research evaluation and 17 were determined to have PI-ME/CFS
by a panel of clinical experts with unanimous consensus. Twenty-one
comparator healthy volunteers were recruited separately. Additional
recruitment was terminated due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cohort characteristics
Characteristics of the participants are detailed in Fig. 1b, c and Sup-
plementary Data S5; there were no group differences in age, sex, or
BMI. There were no group differences in performance validity testing
(Supplementary Data S6); a method for determining whether neu-
ropsychological test performances are overly impacted by non-
cognitive factors13. Patient reported outcome measurement informa-
tion system (PROMIS) and other questionnaires for fatigue, emotional
distress, sleep disturbances, anxiety and other symptoms were greater
(p < 0.05) in PI-ME/CFS than HVs (Fig. 1c, Supplementary Data S7).
There were no clinically relevant ﬁndings on physical examination,
psychological evaluation, or laboratory testing in either group (Sup-
plementary Data S8, 9). Measurements of small nerve ﬁber density and
neuronal injury markers in blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid were not
different between groups (Supplementary Fig. S1). Polysomnography
did not reveal clinically relevant ﬁndings (Supplementary Information,
Sleep dysfunction). The groups did not differ in composition by whole-
body dual energy X-ray absorptiometry or in slow-to-fast muscle ﬁber
atrophy14 as measured by Type 2: Type 1 muscle ﬁber median Feret
diameter ratio (Type2:1 mFd) using ATPase pH 9.4 stain of the vastus
lateralis (Supplementary Figs. S2 and S3D).
Autonomic dysfunction as measured by multiple parameters in
PI-ME/CFS
Head-up tilt table testing for up to 40 min showed no group differ-
ences in frequency of orthostatic hypotension, excessive orthostatic
tachycardia, or tilt-related symptoms requiring test cessation. Twenty-
four hour ambulatory ECG showed that PI-ME/CFS participants had
diminished heart rate variability (HRV) in SDNNi, rMSSD, and pNN50
time domain indices (Fig. 2a–d). PI-ME/CFS participants also had
altered frequency domain differences, with decreased high frequency
(HF) and low frequency (LF) power (Fig. 2e, f). Non-linear analyses
adjusted by hour of the day further demonstrated group differences in
(p = 1.1E−12), SD2 (p = 2.1E−05), and SD1/SD2 (p = 3.9E−07). Similarly,
group heart rates displayed two notable trends (Fig. 2g). Increased
heart rate in PI-ME/CFS participants throughout the course of a day
suggests comparatively increased sympathetic activity. PI-ME/CFS
participants also had a diminished drop in nighttime heart rate sug-
gesting diminished parasympathetic activity, consistent with observed
differences in rMSSD, HF power, pNN50, and SD1. A decrease in bar-
oslope (Fig. 2h) and longer blood pressure recovery times after the
Valsalva maneuver (3.0 ± 0.2 versus 4.1 ± 0.4 sec, p = 0.014) in PI-ME/
CFS reﬂect decreased baroreﬂex-cardiovagal function. Considered
together, these data suggest that there is an alteration in autonomic
tone, implying central nervous system regulatory change.
Altered effort preference in PI-ME/CFS
The Effort-Expenditure for Rewards Task (EEfRT)15 was used to assess
effort, task-related fatigue, and reward sensitivity (Supplementary
Fig. S5A–D). Given equal levels and probabilities of reward, HVs chose
more hard tasks than PI-ME/CFS participants (Odds Ratio (OR) = 1.65
[1.03, 2.65], p = 0.04; Fig. 3a). Two-way interactions showed no group
differences in responses to task-related fatigue (Relative Odds Ratio
(ROR) = 1.01 [0.99, 1.03], p = 0.53; Fig. 3a), reward value (ROR = 1.57
[0.97, 2.53], p = 0.07), reward probability (ROR = 0.50 [0.09, 2.77],
p = 0.43), and expected value (ROR = 0.98 [0.54, 1.79], p = 0.95). Effort
preference, the decision to avoid the harder task when decision-
making is unsupervised and reward values and probabilities of
receiving a reward are standardized, was estimated using the Propor-
tion of Hard-Task Choices (PHTC) metric. This metric summarizes
performance across the entire task and reﬂects the signiﬁcantly lower
rate of hard-trial selection in PI-ME/CFS participants (Fig. 3a). There
was no group difference in the probability of completing easy tasks but
therewas a decline in button-pressing speed over time noted for the PI-
ME/CFS participants (Slope = −0.008, SE = 0.002, p = 0.003; Fig. 3b).
This pattern suggests the PI-ME/CFS participants were pacing to limit
exertion and associated feelings of discomfort16. HVs were more likely
to complete hard tasks (OR = 27.23 [6.33, 117.14], p < 0.0001) but there
was no difference in the decline in button-press rate over time for
either group for hard tasks (Fig. 3b).
Equivalent motor performance in PI-ME/CFS and healthy
volunteers
On single grip task, maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) was not
different between groups (Fig. 3c) and correlated with lean arm mass
but not effort preference or Type2:1 mFd (Supplementary Fig. S6A–C).
Time to failure, the inability to maintain grip force at 50% of maximum
contraction, was signiﬁcantly shorter (p = 0.0002) in the PI-ME/CFS
participants (Fig. 3d) and correlated with effort preference (Fig. 3e) in
PI-ME/CFS but not in HVs. Time to failure did not correlate with lean
arm mass or Type2:1 mFd in either group.
Repetitive grip testing was performed on a subgroup of partici-
pants. MVC did not differ between groups. A rapid decline in force
along with a signiﬁcantly lower number of non-fatigued blocks (Fig. 4a)
and a relative decrease in the slope of the Dimitrov index17,18 (Fig. 4b)
occurred inPI-ME/CFS participants but both remained constant in HVs,
suggesting that the decline of force was not due to peripheral fatigue
or a neuromuscular disorder. Motor Evoked Potential amplitudes
using transcranial magnetic stimulation of HVs decreased over the
course of the task, consistent with post-exercise depression as seen in
healthy and depressed volunteers19, while they increased in PI-ME/CFS
participants (Fig. 4c). This indicates that the primary motor cortex
remained
excitable
for
PI-ME/CFS,
suggesting
reduced
motor
engagement from this group20.
Decreased activation of integrative brain regions in PI/ME-CFS
Repetitive grip testing by functional brain imaging was performed on a
subgroup of participants and also showed a rapid decline in force
(Supplementary Fig. S7E) and a signiﬁcantly lower number of non-
fatigued blocks (p = 0.004) in PI-ME/CFS. First, we assessed commonly
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
2

activated brain areas by implementing a conjunction analysis in which
we took each group t-test across all blocks, thresholded voxels at
p ≤0.01 with a multiple comparison correction at p = 0.05, k > 65 and
kept voxels that were commonly activated in each group. HV and PI-
ME/CFS participants showed force-related brain activation in the left
M1, right cerebellum, and left putamen during the task. We next
assessed group differences with t-test (at p = 0.01, k > 65), but there
was no difference between the groups. We also assessed changes
across blocks with a two-way ANOVA (2 groups × 4 blocks), which
showed that blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal of PI-ME/
CFS participants decreased across blocks bilaterally in temporo-
parietal junction (TPJ) and superior parietal lobule, and right temporal
gyrus in contradistinction to the increase observed in HVs (F
(3,45) = 5.4,
voxel
threshold
p ≤0.01,
corrected
for
multiple
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
3

comparisons p ≤0.05, k > 65; Fig. 4d, e). TPJ activity is inversely cor-
related with the match between willed action and the produced
movement.
Differential cardiorespiratory performance in PI-ME/CFS
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) was performed on eight PI-
ME/CFS and nine HVs (Supplementary Fig. S8A). During testing, all but
one PI-ME/CFS participant reached the peak respiratory exchange
ratio (RER) of ≥1.1 and there was no difference between the groups.
Effort preference did not correlate with peak power in PI-ME/CFS
participants (Supplementary Fig. S8B). The ratio of Ventilation/VCO2,
oxygen saturation levels in the quadricep muscle as measured by Near
Infrared Spectroscopy, and gross mechanical efﬁciency were not dif-
ferent between groups (Supplementary Fig. S8C–E). These results
suggest that PI-ME/CFS participants performed to the best of their
abilities.
Fig. 1 | Patient recruitment and characteristics. a Diagram showing the proce-
dure followed to recruit adjudicated Post-infectious Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (PI-ME/CFS) and matched healthy volunteers (HV) and
measurements undertaken for deep phenotyping of the cohorts. The number of
participants at each stage of recruitment are noted. b Comparisons of age, sex, and
BMI distribution in HV (blue; n = 21 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red;
n = 17 independent participants) using unadjusted two-sided t-tests for indepen-
dent samples. c Distribution of the response of HV (blue; n = 21 independent
participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 17 independent participants) to the indicated
patient reported outcome questionnaires. Group comparisons performed using
unadjusted two-sided Mann–Whitney-U tests. CSF cerebrospinal ﬂuid, PBMC per-
ipheral blood mononuclear cell, BMI body mass index, PROMIS Patient-Reported
Outcomes Measurement Information System, PHQ-15 Patient Health Questionnaire
– 15, MASQ Multiple Ability Self-Report Questionnaire. Figure 1A created with
Biorender.com. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Fig. 2 | Diminished heart rate variability measures are consistent with
decreased parasympathetic activity in the PI-ME/CFS cohort compared to HV.
a Table of time and frequency domain heart rate variability measurements. Group
comparisons for panel a were performed with unadjusted two-sided
Mann–Whitney U tests. Box plots comparing HV (blue; n = 19 independent parti-
cipants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 14 independent participants) for (b) SDNNI (msec)
(c) rMSSD (msec, p = 0.019, unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples
with equal variance) (d) pNN50 (%, p = 0.017, unadjusted two-sided Mann–Whitney
U test) (e) lnHF(ms2) (f) lnLF (ms2). Box plots depict the median (horizontal line)
within quartiles 1–3 (bounds of box). Whiskers extend to minimum and maximum
values g: Mean heart rate of HV (blue; n = 20 independent participants) and PI-ME/
CFS (red; n = 13 independent participants) of 5-min segmented intervals over a 24-h
period graphed over 24-h period. Error bars represent ±SE for each 5-min time
block for each group. Note HV graph (blue) demonstrates ﬂuctuations throughout
the day with subject heart rates displaced slightly higher, suggesting increased
sympathetic activity. Similarly, the typical sinusoidal drop in heart rate over
sleeping hours is diminished in subjects also suggesting diminished para-
sympathetic and/or increased sympathetic activity. h Box plot of baroreﬂex-
cardiovagal gain as measured by mean baroslope (ms/mmHg). HVs (blue; n = 19
independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 16 independent participants) are
compared using an unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal
variance (p = 0.015). Box plot H depicts the median (horizontal line) within quartiles
1–3 (bounds of box). Whiskers extend to minimum and maximum values. SDNNi
standard deviation of the average NN intervals for each 5 min segment of a 24 h
HRV recording, rMSSD root mean square of successive differences between normal
heartbeats, pNN50 proportion of NN50 divided by the total number of NN (R-R)
intervals, HF high frequency, LF low frequency, SD1 standard deviation of Poincaré
plot of RR intervals perpendicular to the line-of-identity, SD2 standard deviation of
the Poincaré plot of RR intervals along the line-of-identity. Source data are provided
as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
4

Peak power (p = 0.08), peak respiratory rate, peak heart rate
(p = 0.07), and peak VO2 (p = 0.004) were all lower in the PI-ME/CFS
participants (Fig. 5a–d), a difference of approximately 3.3 metabolic
equivalent of task units (METs). These peak measures did not correlate
with effort preference in PI-ME/CFS. PI-ME/CFS participants performed
at a lower percentage of their predicted VO2peak (Fig. 5e) as determined
by the Wasserman-Hansen cycling equation21,22 and at a lower per-
centage of their age-predicted maximal heart rate (Supplementary
Fig. S8F). The lower peak heart rate and higher resting heart rate for PI-
ME/CFS participants led to a lower heart rate reserve (Fig. 5f). Chron-
otropic incompetence, as measured by age-predicted HRR (%pHRR),
was noted in ﬁve of eight PI-ME/CFS and one of nine HVs (X2 (1,
n = 17) = 4.9, p = 0.03). The slope of the heart rate response during the
CPET was also lower in PI-ME/CFS participants compared to HVs
(1.03 ± 0.16 versus 0.70 ± 0.27, p < 0.01; Fig. 5g). Anaerobic threshold
(AT) was achieved within a similar time period and occurred at lower
VO2 levels in PI-ME/CFS (Fig. 5h), a difference of approximately 1.4
METs. VO2 at AT also correlated with Type2:1 mFd (Supplementary
Fig. S8J) in PI-ME/CFS but not HVs, evidence of concomitant muscular
deconditioning. Salivary cortisol measurements taken at rest in the
morning, at noon, and before sleep showed no group differences but
were signiﬁcantly lower in PI-ME/CFS participants one hour after CPET
(Supplementary Fig. S8L). Thus, despite successful CPET engagement,
PI-ME/CFS participants were less likely to achieve their predicted
maximal output, suggesting a differential cardiorespiratory perfor-
mance related to autonomic function, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis hyporesponsiveness, and muscular deconditioning from disuse
that clinically impacts activities of daily life 23. This was supported by
at-home waist actigraphy measures, demonstrating a lower step count
and total activity for PI-ME/CFS participants due to less moderate
intensity activity (40.64 ± 37.4 versus 6.4 ± 7.0 min/day; p = 0.007).
Despite altered cardiorespiratory function, there were no clini-
cally meaningful differences in dietary energy intake (Supplementary
Data S11) or total body energy use, sleeping energy use, or respiratory
quotient between the groups before or after CPET testing (Supple-
mentary Fig. S9A–D; Supplementary Data S12).
Increased cognitive symptoms but normal neurocognitive test-
ing in PI-ME/CFS
PI-ME/CFS participants had more self-reported total cognitive com-
plaints (66.9 ± 14.7 versus 92.1 ± 17.6, p = 0.00006) and in all ﬁve cog-
nitive domains measured: attention, verbal memory, visuoperceptual,
language, and visual memory (Fig. 1c). In contrast, there were no group
differences in performance of any of the 15 neuropsychological tests
administered (Supplementary Data S13) or differential degradation of
performance
over
time
(Supplementary
Information,
Cognitive
Fig. 3 | Impaired effort measures and motor performance were observed in PI-
ME/CFS cohort compared to HV. a, b Effort-Expenditure for Rewards Task:
a Probability of choosing the hard task is signiﬁcantly more in HV (blue, n = 16
independent participants) compared with PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 15 independent
participants) at the start of and throughout the task. The Odds Ratio for the
probability of choosing the hard task at the start of the task is 1.65 [1.03, 2.65],
p = 0.04 using Fisher’s Exact test. The lines are the curvilinear ﬁts and the error
bands are the conﬁdence intervals. Decline rates (i.e. response to fatigue) between
the groups is similar as the trial progresses. b Button press rates for easy (right) and
hard (left) tasks as the trial progresses is shown for HV (blue) and PI-ME/CFS (red)
participants. The lines are the linear ﬁts and the shaded error bands are the con-
ﬁdence intervals. The decline in button press rate over time during the easy tasks in
PI-ME/CFS did not impact easy task performance, which is supportive of pacing in
PI-ME/CFS participants. c–e Grip Strength test: Box plots of (c) maximum grip force
of HV (blue; n = 20 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 16 indepen-
dent participants) and (d) time to failure of HV (blue; n = 18 independent partici-
pants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 16 independent participants), unadjusted two-sided
t-test for independent samples with equal variance, p = 0.0002. Correlation
between time to failure and (e) proportion of hard task choices in HV (blue; n = 15
independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 14 independent participants).
For ﬁgure e, the relationship between indicated variables in x and y axis were ﬁtted
by linear regression in each group. Linear regression t-tests were used to determine
non-zero slope. Exact p values of the correlations are presented on the graph. For
box plots c and d, boxes depict the median (horizontal line) within quartiles 1–3
(bounds of box). Whiskers extend to minimum and maximum values. Source data
are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
5

Function). No correlations were noted between any of the 15 neu-
ropsychological tests administered and effort preference.
Differential cerebrospinal ﬂuid catechols and metabolite proﬁle
in PI-ME/CFS
In cerebrospinal ﬂuid, the PI-ME/CFS group had statistically signiﬁcant
decreased levels of DOPA, DOPAC, and DHPG (Fig. 6a–c). Levels of
norepinephrine, cys-DOPA, and dopamine did not differ between the
groups. These results did not change after excluding data from parti-
cipants taking central-acting medications.
Additional analysis revealed that norepinephrine correlated with
both time to failure and effort preference in PI-ME/CFS participants
(Fig. 6d, e). Dopamine correlated with time to failure (Fig. 6f) but not
with effort preference (Supplementary Fig. S11B). Among HVs, DHPG
correlated with effort preference (Fig. 6g) but not with time to failure
(Supplementary Fig. S11C). Several cognitive symptoms correlated
with catechols in PI-ME/CFS participants (Supplementary Fig. S12A–I).
In contradistinction, objective neurocognitive performance showed
that only the Wisconsin Card Sort Test correlated with DOPA in PI-ME/
CFS participants (Supplementary Fig. S12J). For HVs, several correla-
tions between catechols and neuropsychological tests were observed
(Supplementary Fig. S12K–O). These correlations suggest that per-
ception and behavior, but not cognitive performance, are related to
catechol levels in PI-ME/CFS participants.
Metabolomic analysis of cerebrospinal ﬂuid also showed group
differences (Fig. 6h). Tryptophan metabolites were among the top 15
differentially expressed and statistically signiﬁcant after correction for
multiple comparisons (Fig. 6i). Decreased glutamate, dopamine 3-O-
sulfate, butyrate, polyamine, and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) pathway
metabolites were noted in PI-ME/CFS participants (Supplementary
Data S14A). Threonine and glutamine were decreased in males (Fig. 6j,
Supplementary Fig. S13D, Supplementary Data S14C). Several trypto-
phan metabolites were decreased in females suggesting a decrease in
serotonin signaling (Fig. 6k, Supplementary Fig. S13E, Supplementary
Data S14D). This was irrespective of NSRI/SSRI use.
Immune activation and sex-based differences in PI-ME/CFS
There were no group differences in percentage of CD4, CD8, and CD19
cells in both peripheral blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Supplementary
Data S15A and Supplementary Fig. S15C). An increase in percentage of
naïve and decrease in switched memory B-cells in blood were observed
in PI-ME/CFS participants (Fig. 7a, b). Two PI-ME/CFS participants had
detectable antibody secreting B-cells in cerebrospinal ﬂuid; these
participants did not have oligoclonal bands or autoantibodies. There
was no group difference in NK cell frequency, but a subset of PI-ME/
CFS participants had an elevated percentage of NK CD56 bright/dim
ratio in cerebrospinal ﬂuid. No group differences were noted in NK
lytic units, CD16/CD56 ratio, and plasma GDF-15 levels in blood. Dis-
covery assays for a small panel of autoantibodies detected low levels in
one PI-ME/CFS and two HVs.
Markersof T-cell activation, PD-1+ CD8 T-cells, were elevated inthe
cerebrospinal ﬂuid of PI-ME/CFS participants (Fig. 7c). PD-1+ CD4
T-cells did not change in blood or cerebrospinal ﬂuid. To expand on
these observations, other T-cell markers (TIGIT, CD244, and CD226)
were analyzed in a subset of participants. CD226+ CD8 T-cells were
decreased in blood (Fig. 7d) of PI-ME/CFS participants with no change
in expression of CD244 or TIGIT (Supplementary Data S15B, D).
When stratiﬁed by sex, PI-ME/CFS males had increased CXCR5
expression on CD8 + T-cells in cerebrospinal ﬂuid (Fig. 7e). PI-ME/CFS
females had increased CD8+ naïve T-cells in blood (Fig. 7f), indicating
different subpopulation of immune cells are enriched in the male and
female PI-ME/CFS groups.
Fig. 4 | Impaired sustained effort and motor performance was observed in PI-
ME/CFS cohort compared to HV. a–e Repetitive Grip Strength test: a Grip force
normalized to maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) in the ﬁrst block, the last
block prior to fatigue onset, and the ﬁrst three blocks after fatigue onset in HV
(blue) and PI-ME/CFS cohorts (red). A signiﬁcant grip force difference was noted
between the groups (−1.2 ± 4 versus −6.4 ± 4 kilogram-force units, t(12) = 2.46,
p = 0.03). The number of non-fatigued grip test blocks of HV (blue) and PI-ME/CFS
(red) participants is also displayed. b Slope of the Dimitrov index across the ﬁrst
block (b1), the last block prior to fatigue onset (bn), and the ﬁrst three blocks after
fatigue onset (f1, f2, and f3) in HV (blue; n = 6 independent participants) and PI-ME/
CFS (red; n = 8 independent participants) patients. A signiﬁcant difference was
noted between the groups (0.2 ± 0.5 versus −0.43 ± 0.3, t(12) = 3.2, p = 0.008).
c Mean and standard error of the motor evoked potential of HV (blue; n = 6
independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8 independent participants)
participants spanning the last ﬁve grip test blocks prior to fatigue onset. The
amplitudes of the MEPs of HVs signiﬁcantly decreased over the course of the task
while the amplitudes of the MEPs of PI-ME/CFS participants signiﬁcantly increased
(−0.13 ± 0.2 versus 0.13 ± 0.2 MEP units; t(12) = 2.4, p = 0.03 D. Brain regions where
Blood Oxygen Dependent (BOLD) signal decreased over grip strength blocks in PI-
ME/CFS patients and increased over grip strength blocks in HVs. e Brain activation
of the regions depicted in d measured in the blocks of four over the course of the
experiment in HV (blue; n = 10 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8
independent participants) cohorts. For e, a two-way ANOVA was run where
F(3,45) = 5.4 with a voxel threshold of p ≤0.01, corrected for multiple comparisons
p ≤0.05, k > 65 (p-values were 0.976, 0.43, 0.02 (*), and 0.02 (*) for blocks 1 to 4
respectively). Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
6

Analysis of PBMC gene expression for all participants by principal
component analysis (PCA) revealed no outliers (Fig. 8a). 614 differen-
tially expressed (DE) genes clustered the samples based on disease
status. However, exploration of PCA plot showed that samples clus-
tered based on their sex (Fig. 8b). Assessment of interaction between
sex and disease status was not signiﬁcant. This suggests sex is a
potential confounder impacting gene expression. Hence DE analysis in
male and female cohorts was performed, which identiﬁed distinct
subsets of DE genes, with only 34 (<5%) genes overlapping between
them (Fig. 8c, Supplementary Data S16A, B). PCA of DE genes in each
sex cohort clustered the samples into distinct HV and PI-ME/CFS
groups (Fig. 8d, f).
887 DE genes in male HV and PI-ME/CFS cohorts enriched
(p < 0.05) in ubiquitin, IL-10, T-cell, and NF-kB pathways (Fig. 8h, i). DE
genes related to the STAT4-TLR9 protein-protein interactome and
were upregulated in male PI-ME/CFS participants (Supplementary
Fig. S14A). 849 DE genes identiﬁed in female HV and PI-ME/CFS cohorts
were enriched in B-cell proliferation processes (Fig. 8j, k) and DE genes
identiﬁed in the B-cell interactome were upregulated in female PI-ME/
CFS participants (Supplementary Fig. S14B). Additionally, DE genes
were also enriched in cytokine and lymphocyte proliferation pro-
cesses. These data are consistent with expansion of naïve B-cells by the
STAT4-TLR9 and other B-cell pathways observed in PI-ME/CFS by ﬂow
cytometry.
PCA analysis of aptamers measured in serum and cerebrospinal
ﬂuid did not identify outliers. Univariate analysis of the aptamer
datasets did not identify any FDR-corrected statistically signiﬁcant
differential features between PI-ME/CFS and HV participants (Supple-
mentary Data S17A, B). Within each sex separately, exploratory multi-
variate analyses suggested a subset of aptamers were predictive of PI-
ME/CFS status, which are reported for potential validation (Supple-
mentary Fig. S15A–D, S16A–D; Supplementary Data S17C–F).
Sex differences in PI-ME/CFS were also assessed in a publicly
deposited ME/CFS RNASeq dataset (GSE130353) from monocytes
(Supplementary Fig. S17A–D). Of 638 DE genes in males and 420 DE
genes in females, only 23 genes were common (Supplementary
Fig. S17E). These observations support that distinct biological pro-
cesses are perturbed in male and female PI-ME/CFS patients.
Sex-based differences in muscle gene expression proﬁle in PI-
ME/CFS
PCA analysis of muscle gene expression did not identify any outliers
(Fig. 9a). Univariate analysis did not identify any FDR-corrected sta-
tistically signiﬁcant differential features (Supplementary Data S19A).
The PCA identiﬁed clustering based on sex (Fig. 9b). Only 15 DE genes
were common in male and female cohorts (Fig. 9c), consistent with
prior observations. In the male PCA of 593 DE genes, clustering was
observed based on the disease status (Fig. 9d, e). Genes upregulated in
Fig. 5 | Impaired cardiopulmonary performance was observed in PI-ME/CFS
cohort compared to HV. Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test (CPET) a–h: Box plots of
(a) peak power attained during CPET for HV (blue; n = 9 independent participants)
and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8 independent participants) participants, (b) peak
respiratory rate with the error bars representing ±SD at each work rate, (c) peak
heart rate (unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with unequal
variance, p = 0.072), (d) Peak VO2 (unadjusted two-sided t-test with equal variance,
p = 0.002), (e) Percent of predicted VO2 achieved of HV (blue; n = 9 independent
participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8 independent participants) participants
(unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal variance,
p = 0.004), and (f) heart rate reserve for HV (blue; n = 9 independent participants)
and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8 independent participants) participants (unadjusted two-
sided t-test for independent samples with equal variance, p = 0.011). g Heart rate as
a function of % total CPET time depicted as expected for age and gender of HV
(n = 9 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (n = 8 independent participants)
(gray solid and dashed lines, respectively, unadjusted two-sided Mann–Whitney U
test for independent samples). Mean heart rate responses from the CPET are
depicted for HV (blue line) and PI-ME/CFS (red line). A signiﬁcant difference was
observed for the heart rate slope between PI-ME/CFS and expected (0.70 ± 0.27
versus 1.05 ± 0.12, p = 0.014), but not for HV and expected (1.03 ± 0.16 versus
1.08 ± 0.13; p = 0.479). The deviation from expected relation reﬂects chronotropic
incompetence in the PI-ME/CFS group. h Box plot of VO2 atthe anaerobic threshold
(AT) in HV (blue; n = 9 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8 inde-
pendent participants) using an unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent sam-
ples with equal variance (p = 0.024). For box plots a, c–f, and h boxes depict the
median (horizontal line) within quartiles 1–3 (bounds of box). Whiskers extend to
minimum and maximum values. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
7

the PI-ME/CFS males were enriched in epigenetic changes and pro-
cessing of RNA and the downregulated genes were enriched in hexose
metabolism and mitochondrial processes (Fig. 9h–i). Several genes
involved in fatty acid beta-oxidation were upregulated, in an inter-
active network (Supplementary Fig. S18A). In the females, PCA of the
328 DE genes showed distinct clusters of HV and PI-ME/CFS samples
(Fig. 9f, g). DE genes upregulated in the PI-ME/CFS females were
enriched in growth hormone receptor signaling and ubiquitin trans-
ferase function (Fig. 9j). Downregulated genes were involved in fatty
acid oxidation and mitochondrial processes (Fig. 9k). A subset of these
downregulated fatty acid oxidation genes was highly inter-connected
(Supplementary Fig. S18B). Skeletal fatty acid oxidation is regulated
during exercise as fatty acid uptake, is increased after moderate
exercise24,25, and is downregulated in muscle deconditioning26. These
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
8

results suggest sex differential in the muscular bioenergetics and
muscular deconditioning of PI-ME/CFS participants27.
Lack of differences in lipidomics between PI-ME/CFS and healthy
volunteers
Univariate analysis of the plasma lipidomic data did not identify sta-
tistically signiﬁcant differences between HV and PI-ME/CFS groups
(Supplementary Data S20). Multivariate analysis in all participants as
well as in male and female cohorts separately identiﬁed several lipids
as important variables in prediction (Supplementary Fig. S19A–C) and
are consistent with a prior lipidomic analysis28.
Differential fecal microbiota in PI-ME/CFS by shotgun
metagenomics
Differences in the alpha diversity of stool samples (Supplementary
Fig. S20A, B, D) were noted with HVs having a greater number of taxa
within the samples (Number of Observed Features, p = 0.002) but no
differences in average proportional abundance (Inverse Simpson
Index, p = 0.79). Beta diversity, as measured by Bray–Curtis dissim-
ilarity (Supplementary Fig. S20C), demonstrated signiﬁcant differ-
ences in microbial community composition between the groups
(PERMANOVA p < 0.0081).
Validation of diagnosis and course of illness on longitudinal
follow-up
Within four years of participation, four of the 17 PI-ME/CFS participants
had a spontaneous full recovery. No other new medical diagnoses were
reported by the PI-ME/CFS participants.
Discussion
This study obtained a more extensive set of biological measurements
in people with PI-ME/CFS than any previous study. Although the
number of study subjects was small compared to the prior literature, it
identiﬁed biological alterations and conﬁrmed some previously
reported biological alterations.
All patients had documentation of good health followed by an
episode of infection that led to ME/CFS symptoms. All PI-ME/CFS
participants reported clinically substantial fatigue, physical symptoms,
and decreased functional status that was 1.5 to two standard deviations
worse than the general population. Cases were reviewed by a panel of
adjudicators that had to unanimously agree on the case validity to be
included in this cohort. Only 10% of those with completed reviews were
adjudicated as PI-ME/CFS cases. Even in the cases that met study cri-
teria, diagnostic misattribution was noted in 20%, with underlying
causes becoming manifest over time. This misclassiﬁcation bias has
important ramiﬁcations on the interpretation of the existing ME/CFS
research literature8.
Another challenge to the characterization of ME/CFS is concerns
about the validity of the manifestations due to depression or anxiety29.
Our cohort underwent substantial performance validity testing using
neuropsychological measures and demonstrated consistency of
response, suggesting that their symptoms were reliable and a true
representation of their disease. Even though PI-ME/CFS participants
endorsed more depressive and anxiety symptoms than HVs, they did
not meet psychiatric diagnostic criteria. There was also no difference
in psychiatric history or reporting of traumatic events between the two
groups. Thus, psychiatric disorders were not a major feature in this
cohort and did not account for the severity of their symptoms.
We ﬁrst determined the physiological basis of fatigue in PI-ME/
CFS participants. The notion of fatigue, as we use it, is a limit on ability
or a diminution of ability to perform a task. Effort preference is how
much effort a person subjectively wants to exert. It is often seen as a
trade-off between the energy needed to do a task versus the reward for
having tried to do it successfully. If there is developing fatigue, the
effort will have to increase, and the effort:beneﬁt ratio will increase,
perhaps to the point where a person will prefer to lose a reward than to
exert effort. Thus, as fatigue develops, failure can occur because of
depletion of capacity or an unfavorable preference.
There were no differences in ventilatory function, muscle oxyge-
nation, mechanical efﬁciency, resting energy expenditure, basal
mitochondrial function of immune cells30, muscle ﬁber composition,
or body composition supporting the absence of a resting low-energy
state. However, substantial differences were noted in PI-ME/CFS par-
ticipants during physical tasks. Compared to HVs, PI-ME/CFS partici-
pants failed to maintain a moderate grip force even though there was
no difference in maximum grip strength or arm muscle mass. This
difference in performance correlated with decreased activity of the
right temporal-parietal junction, a part of the brain that is focused on
determining
mismatch
between
willed
action
and
resultant
movement31. Mismatch relates to the degree of agency, i.e., the sense
of control of the movement32. Greater activation in the HVs suggests
that they are attending in detail to their slight failures, while the PI-ME/
CFS participants are accomplishing what they are intending. This was
further validated by measures of peripheral muscular fatigue and
motor cortex fatigue20,33 that increased only in the HVs. Thus, the
fatigue of PI-ME/CFS participants is due to dysfunction of integrative
brain regions that drive the motor cortex, the cause of which needs to
be further explored. This is an observation not previously described in
this population.
Additionally, the results suggest the impact of effort preference,
operationalized by the decision to choose a harder task when decision-
making is unsupervised and reward values are held constant, on per-
formance. 32–74% of the variance in time to grip failure for the PI-ME/
CFS participants correlated with effort preference, which was not seen
in HVs. This was accompanied by reduced brain activation in the right
temporal-parietal area in PI-ME/CFS participants. Interviews with PI-
ME/CFS participants revealed that sustained effort led to post-
exertional
malaise34.
Conscious
and
unconscious
behavioral
Fig. 6 | Differential catecholamines and tryptophan pathway metabolites levels
in PI-ME/CFS patients cerebrospinal ﬂuid. a–c Box plot of the indicated neuro-
transmitters on y axis in HV (blue; n = 21 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS
(red;n = 16 independent participants) in (a) unadjusted two-sided Mann–Whitney U
test (p = 0.021), (b), unadjusted two-sided Mann–Whitney U test (p = 0.025), and (c)
unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal variance
(p = 0.006). For box plots a–c boxes depict the median (horizontal line) within
quartiles 1–3 (bounds of box). Whiskers extend to minimum and maximum values.
Correlation between cerebrospinal ﬂuid norepinephrine (NE) and (d) time to failure
on grip strength task in HV (blue; n = 18 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS
(red; n = 15 independent participants) or (e) proportion of hard task choices (i.e.,
effort preference) in HVs (blue; n = 14 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS
(red; n = 14 independent participants). f Correlation between cerebrospinal ﬂuid
dopamine and time to failure in HVs (blue; n = 17 independent participants) and PI-
ME/CFS (red; n = 14 independent participants). g Correlation between
cerebrospinal ﬂuid DHPG and proportion of hard task choices (i.e., effort pre-
ference) in HVs (blue; n = 14 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 14
independent participants). For ﬁgures d–g, the relationship between indicated
variables in x and y axis were ﬁtted by linear regression in each group. The exact p
value of each regression is presented on the graph, linear regression t-test for
nonzero slope. h PCA computed from all metabolites measured from the cere-
brospinal ﬂuid samples in the indicated groups. i Heatmap of statistically signiﬁcant
(false discoveryrate adjustedp-value < 0.05) differentially expressed metabolites in
the indicated groups on x axis and the metabolites labeled on y axis. Red: upre-
gulated; Blue: downregulated. Supervised clustering of metabolites measured from
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples in (j) male cohorts and (k) female cohorts from
PLSDA analysis. DHPG (S)−3,5-Dihydroxyphenylglycine, PLSDA Partial least square
discriminant analysis, PC principal component. Source data are provided as a
Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
9

alterations to pace and avoid discomfort may underlie the differential
performance observed35.
We measured peripheral fatigue (high:low ratio) and central fati-
gue (post exercise depression). Both types of fatigue were seen in the
HVs but not in the PI-ME/CFS participants. Moreover, testing of effort
preference and the participants’ own words (Supplementary Infor-
mation, p.10) are consistent with this ﬁnding. Together these ﬁndings
suggest that effort preference, not fatigue, is the deﬁning motor
behavior of this illness.
Consistent with this observation, with strong encouragement
during CPET, all but one of the PI-ME/CFS participants reached a
respiratory exchange ratio of 1.1. The PI-ME/CFS group showed a clear
reduction in cardiorespiratory ﬁtness by reaching the AT at a lower
level of work and ventilation36. At maximal performance, a substantial
group difference in cardiorespiratory capacity became apparent,
which was related to both chronotropic incompetence and physical
deconditioning. These observations provide clarity to previous studies
with inconsistent results37. Thus, incorporation of measures of auto-
nomic tone and physical condition into studies of exercise perfor-
mance is critical to understand the mechanisms of diminished
cardiorespiratory function in ME/CFS38.
A frequent complaint in our PI-ME/CFS cohort was cognitive
dysfunction. This did not correlate with anxiety or depression mea-
sures. Standard clinical laboratory tests, brain imaging, measures of
Fig. 7 | Flow cytometry demonstrates distinct perturbation in immune cell
subpopulation in PBMCs. a Boxplot of the B cell subset naïve (%) in HV (blue;
n = 20 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 17 independent partici-
pants) groups, unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal
variance (p = 0.037). b Boxplot of B cell switched memory in HV (blue; n = 20
independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 16 independent participants)
groups, unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal variance
(p = 0.008). c Boxplot of the CD8 + T cell subset PD-1 (%), Mann–Whitney U test,
exact p-value = 0.033. d Boxplot of the CD8 + T cell subset CD226 (%), unadjusted
two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal variance (p = 0.055). The
samples used for boxplot (d) were collected ata separate time point than the others
boxplots; HV (blue; n = 7 independent participants) and PI-ME/CFS (red; n = 8
independent participants) groups. e Boxplot of CD8 + T cell CXCR5 (%), unadjusted
two-sided t-test for independent samples with equal variance (p = 0.014). f Boxplot
of CD8 + T cell naïve (%), unadjusted two-sided t-test for independent samples with
equal variance (p = 0.016). Where indicated the plots shows the measurements
from female and male cohorts. Measurements in PBMC samples are shown in
shaded box and cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples in open box. For box plots a–f boxes
depict the median (horizontal line) within quartiles 1–3 (bounds of box). Whiskers
extend to minimum and maximum values. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
10

brain
injury,
and
sleep
architecture
were unremarkable.
Neu-
ropsychological testing showed that even though the HV and PI-ME/
CFS participants started with different levels of perceived mental and
physical fatigue, there were no differences in cognitive performance.
Further, both cognitive performance and perceived fatigue changed at
the same rate during testing in both groups. This is consistent with the
absence of a homogenous cognitive deﬁcit in ME/CFS. Previous studies
suggest a small, heterogenous deﬁcit in this population39 which may
not be evident in our study due to the small sample size. Performance
validity testing is not routinely performed in the literature; inclusion of
invalid performances would also bias studies toward differential
performance.
Taken together, thisevidence suggests that physical and cognitive
fatigue may be mechanistically different. Interestingly, PI-ME/CFS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
11

participants’ catechol levels in cerebrospinal ﬂuid correlated with grip
strength and effort preference, and several metabolites of the dopa-
mine pathway correlated with several cognitive symptoms. This sug-
gests that central nervous system catechol pathways are dysregulated
in PI-ME/CFS and may play a role in effort preference and cognitive
complaints40. The pattern suggests decreased central catecholamine
biosynthesis in PI-ME/CFS. Similarly, decreased serum catechols and
their metabolites have recently been reported in Long COVID-19;41,42
testing of cerebrospinal ﬂuid has not yet been reported. Autonomic
testing revealed HRV measures consistent with an increase in sympa-
thetic and a decrease in parasympathetic activity in PI-ME/CFS, and a
decreased baroslope and prolonged pressure recovery after Valsalva
consistent with previous observations of autonomic dysfunction in
ME/CFS6,43.
We investigated several additional biological functions in PI-ME/
CFS. Previous studies have implicated abnormalities in immunity,
mitochondrial function, reduction-oxidation regulation, or altered
microbiome structure in this condition1,3,44,45. There were increased
naïve B-cells and decreased switched memory B-cells in blood of PI-
ME/CFS participants. However, contrary to prior published work46,
there was no consistent pattern of autoimmunity across all PI-ME/CFS
participants and autoantibody discovery assays did not reveal pre-
viously undescribed antibodies. PD-1, a marker of T-cell exhaustion
and activation, was elevated in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid of PI-ME/CFS
participants. Although NK cell function was not different between
groups in blood, they showed decreased expression of a cytolytic
function marker in the spinal ﬂuid. Previous studies suggest that NK
cell function is decreased in ME/CFS47–51, which may not be evident in
our study due to the small sample size.
Autonomic measures revealed an increase in sympathetic and a
decrease parasympathetic activity in PI-ME/CFS that cannot be attrib-
uted to depression or anxiety, which is consistent with previous
observations6,43. There was also distinct gene expression, immune cell
populations, metabolite, and protein proﬁles in male and female PI-
ME/CFS participants. In the male PI-ME/CFS cohort, PBMC gene
expression proﬁling showed perturbations in the T-cell activation,
proteasome and NF-kB pathways. Analyses of serum and cerebrospinal
ﬂuid proteins identiﬁed several molecules related to innate immunity
suggesting a distinct expression pattern in male cohorts. In contrast, in
the female cohorts, gene expression proﬁling of PBMCs identiﬁed
perturbations in B-cell and leukocyte proliferation processes with a
corresponding identiﬁcation of plasma lymphotoxin α1β2, which may
act as a proliferative signal in secondary lymphoid tissues. Addition-
ally, elevated levels of plasminogen in serum and eosinophil protein
galactin-10, the C-C motif chemokine (MDC), and the IL 18 receptor
accessory protein were present in cerebrospinal ﬂuid of female PI-ME/
CFS participants. Plasminogen and lymphotoxin α1β2 are known to
activate proinﬂammatory states via NF-kB52,53. Due to the small sample
size of our study, we further conﬁrmed sex differences in a previously
published data set54. Notably, only 2% of the differentially expressed
elements overlapped between the sex-separated cohort. This suggests
that different immunological phenotypes may distinguish the PI-ME/
CFS phenotype based on sex. The cause of immune dysregulation is
not clear but may suggest the possibility of persistent antigenic
stimulation55. Analysis of the gut microbiome showed differences in
alpha and beta diversity consistent with previous studies3,56. Their
potential role in modulating the immune proﬁle needs further
exploration.
Sex-driven group differences were also observed in gene expres-
sion proﬁles of muscle. Male PI-ME/CFS participants had upregulation
of fatty acid beta-oxidation genes and down regulation of TRAF and
MAP-kinase regulated genes. The female PI-ME/CFS participants had
downregulation of fatty acid metabolism and mitochondrial processes
in muscle. Thus, both males and females PI-ME/CFS samples had
increased oxidative stress, but distinct pathways were perturbed in
both groups.
Metabolomics of cerebrospinal ﬂuid identiﬁed downregulation of
tryptophan metabolites in the PI-ME/CFS cohort, consistent with prior
ME/CFS and Long COVID-19 studies41,57–59. In female cohorts, trypto-
phan, butyrate, and tricarboxylic acid related compounds were iden-
tiﬁed as important variables in classifying HV and PI-ME/CFS groups. In
male cohorts, a different subset of metabolites was identiﬁed as
important classiﬁcation predictors. These ﬁndings need to be vali-
dated in larger PI-ME/CFS cohorts.
This study has several limitations. This was a cross-sectional,
exploratory
case-control
study.
These
data
assess
correlation,
not causality. The sample size of the cohort was small but was very
carefully characterized and was adequate for capturing group differ-
ences, noting important negative ﬁndings, and looking for patterns of
consilience between measures. Consilience was noted among the
multiple
autonomic
measures
suggestive
of
decreased
para-
sympathetic activity in PI-ME/CFS, among ﬂow cytometry and RNA
sequencing measures of adaptive immunity, and in the impact of
sexual dimorphism across immunologic and metabolomic measure-
ments. The small sample size may impact the precision of effect size
measures, with a propensity to inﬂate estimates60. Post-hoc calcula-
tions of the effect size for a phenotyping sample of 21 and 17 partici-
pants to achieve a power of 80% is 0.94, suggesting only large effects
will be noted to be statistically signiﬁcant. Overall, the groups are well-
matched on demographic factors, but individual HV and PI-ME/CFS
participants were not always perfectly matched. Even though a major
effort was made to minimize misattribution, we cannot completely
exclude this possibility.
While we have focused on the positive results above, there were
many results that were not different between HV and PI-ME/CFS par-
ticipants (Supplementary Data S22). While it is possible that small
differences in the groups may be demonstrable in larger cohorts, these
negative results demonstrate that these ﬁndings are not required for
the PI-ME/CFS phenotype and are poor targets for clinical intervention.
Considering all the data together, PI-ME/CFS appears to be a
centrally mediated disorder. We posit this hypothetical mechanism of
how an infection can create a cascade of physiological alterations that
lead to the PI-ME/CFS phenotype (Fig. 10). Exposure to an infection
leads to concomitant immune dysfunction and changes in microbial
composition. Immune dysfunction may be related to both innate and
adaptive immune responses that are sex dependent. One possibility is
Fig. 8 | Male and female cohorts have distinct perturbation in immune cell
subpopulation and biological processes in PBMCs. a, b PCA computed from all
gene expression values with indicated groups: HV (blue), PI-ME/CFS (red) clusters
or males (turquoise) and females (orange) highlighted for the indicated PCs. c Venn
diagram showing common DE genes identiﬁed from male and female cohorts (p
value < 0.05 as ﬁlter for DE genes using an unadjusted two-sided moderated t-test).
DE analysis on the (d, e, h, i) male cohorts and (f, g, j, k) female cohorts. d, f PCA
plots computed from DE genes shows robust clustering of samples based on the PI-
ME/CFS status. e, g Volcano plots shows log transformed statistically signiﬁcant
(unadjusted p-values < 0.05 using an unadjusted two-sided moderated t-test) up
(red) and down regulated (blue) genes in PI-ME/CFS male and female cohorts,
respectively. h, j Heatmaps of a subset of T cell process genes in males and B cell
related processes in females. i, k Pathway enrichment plots showing top 15 path-
ways for which the DE genes from male and female cohorts selected for. The top 15
pathways are labeled on the y axis and the color of the circle is scaledwith –log-10 p-
value and the size of the pathway circles inside the plot are proportional to the
number of genes that overlapped with the indicated pathway. Fisher’s exact test
was used in the ‘clusterProﬁler’ R package to obtain the log-transformed p-values.
Red color nodes: upregulated in PI-ME/CFS and blue color nodes: downregulated in
PI-ME/CFS. DE differentially expressed. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
12

that these changes are related to antigen persistence of the infectious
pathogen61–63.
These immune and microbial alterations impact the central ner-
vous system, leading to decreased concentrations of metabolites,
including glutamate, tryptophan, spermidine, citrate, and the meta-
bolites of dopamine (DOPAC) and norepinephrine (DHPG). The altered
biochemical milieu impacts the function of brain structures. The
catecholamine nuclei release lower levels of catechols, which impacts
the autonomic nervous system leading to decreased heart rate varia-
bility and decreased baroreﬂex cardiovascular function, with down-
stream effects on cardiopulmonary capacity. Concomitant alteration
of hypothalamic function leads to decreased activation of the tem-
poroparietal junction during motor tasks, leading to a failure of the
integrative brain regions necessary to drive the motor cortex. This
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
13

Fig. 9 | Male and female cohorts have distinct differential gene expression
proﬁles in the muscle. a, b PCA computed from all gene expression values in
samples highlighted from the indicated groups: HV (blue) and PI-ME/CFS (red) or
males (turquoise) and females (orange) for the indicated PCs. c Venn diagram
showing common DE genes identiﬁed from male and female cohorts (DE genes are
genes with p value < 0.05 using an unadjusted two-sided moderated t-test). DE
analysis using an unadjusted two-sided moderated t-test on the (d, e, h, i) male
cohorts and (f, g, j, k) female cohorts. d, f PCA plot computed from DE genes shows
robust clustering of samples based on the PI-ME/CFS status. e, g Volcano plots
shows log transformed statistically signiﬁcant (unadjusted p-values < 0.05 using an
unadjusted two-sided moderated t-test) up (red) and down regulated (blue) genes
in PI-ME/CFS male and female cohorts, respectively. Pathway enrichment plot of DE
genes (h) upregulated and (i) downregulated in PI-ME/CFS male cohort. Pathway
enrichment plot of DE genes (j) upregulated and (k) downregulated in PI-ME/CFS
female cohorts. The top 15 pathways are labeled on the y axis and the color of the
circle is scaled with –log-10 p-value and the size of the pathway circles inside the
plot are proportional to the number of genes that overlapped with the indicated
pathway. Fisher’s exact test was used in the ‘clusterProﬁler’ R package to obtain the
log-transformed p-values. Red color nodes: upregulated in PI-ME/CFS and blue
color nodes: downregulated in PI-ME/CFS. DE differentially expressed, PC principal
component. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Fig. 10 | Pathophysiology of PI-ME/CFS. Diagram illustrates potential mechanisms
and a cascade of events that lead to the development of ME/CFS after an infection.
Exposure to an infection leads to concomitant and persistent immune dysfunction
and changes in gut microbiome. Immune dysfunction affects both innate and
adaptive immune systems that are sex dependent. We hypothesize that these
changes are driven by antigen persistence of the infectious pathogen. These
immune and microbial alterations impact the brain, leading to decreased con-
centrations of metabolites which impacts brain function. The catecholamine nuclei
release lower levels of catechols, which impacts the autonomic nervous system and
manifests with decreased heart rate variability and decreased baroreﬂex
cardiovascular function, with downstream effects on cardiopulmonary capacity.
Altered hypothalamic function leads to decreased activation of the temporopar-
ietal junction during motor tasks, suggesting a failure of the integrative brain
regions necessary to drive the motor cortex. This decreased brain activity is
experienced as physical and psychological symptoms and impacts effort pre-
ferences, leading to decreased engagement of the motor system and decreases in
maintaining force output during motor tasks. Both the autonomic and central
motor dysfunction result in a reduction in physical activity. With time, the reduc-
tion in physical activity leads to muscular and cardiovascular deconditioning, and
functional disability. All these features make up the PI-ME/CFS phenotype.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
14

decreased brain activity is experienced as physical and psychological
symptoms and impacts effort preferences, leading to decreased
engagement of the motor system and decreases in maintaining force
output during motor tasks. Both the autonomic and central motor
dysfunction result in a reduction in physical activity. With time, the
reduction in physical activity leads to muscular and cardiovascular
deconditioning, and functional disability. These features make up the
PI-ME/CFS phenotype.
This model suggests places for potential therapeutic intervention
and explains why other therapies have failed. The ﬁnding of possible
immune exhaustion suggests that immune checkpoint inhibitors may
be therapeutic by promoting clearance of foreign antigen. Immune
dysfunction leads to neurochemical alterations that impact neuronal
circuits, which may be another point of intervention. Therapeutically
targeting downstream mechanisms, with exercise, cognitive beha-
vioral therapy, or autonomic directed therapies, may have limited
impact on symptom burden, as it would not address the root cause of
PI-ME/CFS. However, combination therapy affecting multiple path-
ways could be considered. The ﬁnding of substantial physiological
differences related to sex suggest that there may not be a single uniﬁed
mechanism that leads to PI-ME/CFS and that successful therapy may
require a personalized medicine approach.
In conclusion, PI-ME/CFS is a distinct entity characterized by
somatic and cognitive complaints that are centrally mediated. Fatigue
is deﬁned by effort preferences and central autonomic dysfunction.
There are distinct sex signatures of immune and metabolic dysregu-
lation
which
suggest
persistent
antigenic
stimulation.
Physical
deconditioning over time is an important consequence. These ﬁndings
identify potential therapeutic targets for PI-ME/CFS.
Methods
Ethics statement
All research procedures were approved by the NIH Central IRB (NCT
02669212) and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Hel-
sinki. Informed consent was obtained from all study participants.
Recruitment and screening
The PI-ME/CFS group was selected based on medical record doc-
umentation of persistent and severe fatigue and post-exertional
malaise as the consequence of an acute infection within the last ﬁve
years without a prior history of explanatory medical or psychiatric
illness. The full inclusion/exclusion criteria can be found in Supple-
mentary Data S1.
Potential ME/CFS participants initially completed a telephone
screening interview. Those passing the initial screen were contacted
for a physician telephone interview and medical record review. This
review process was iterative, completing when adequate documenta-
tion of infection and ME/CFS was provided, when exclusionary doc-
umentation was noted, or when all available medical records were
exhausted. Only participants with adequate documentation were
invited to NIH for a phenotyping visit for case ascertainment and to
collect research measures.
The healthy volunteer (HV) group consisted of demographically
matched persons without clinical fatigue and free from medical dis-
ease. HVs were recruited from referrals from the NIH Ofﬁce of Patient
Recruitment and responses to study advertisements. HVs were
admitted to the NIH Clinical Center for a phenotyping visit to rule out
occult illness and to collect research measures. HVs without occult
illness were invited to return for an additional exercise stress visit.
Demographic information, including age, birth sex, and gender,
for all participants can be found in the Source Data ﬁle for Fig. 1b. Birth
sex and gender information were collected by self-report during an
intake interview by the study physician (BW). ME/CFS is reported to
occur three times more frequently in females and efforts were made in
recruitment to obtain a balanced birth sex distribution. All participants
were compensated consistent with National Institutes of Health
guidelines.
Case ascertainment
Participants who potentially qualiﬁed based on screening were
admitted to the NIH Clinical Center for a week-long case ascertainment
visit. A detailed history and physical was performed on each partici-
pant in duplicate. An internal medicine nurse practitioner and a
rheumatologist performed separate evaluations and consulted toge-
ther after both were completed. A complete standardized neurological
evaluation was performed by a board-certiﬁed neurologist. A psy-
chiatric evaluation was performed by a licensed psychologist. Medical
consultants were engaged to evaluate participants when appropriate.
Laboratory and imaging studies were performed to investigate
potential health issues noted during these medical evaluations. Clinical
laboratory testing of blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid, brain magnetic
resonance imaging, polysomnography, and an orthostatic challenge
were also used in case ascertainment and are described in more
detail below.
We excluded participants taking systemic immunomodulatory
drugs. All participants were on stable medication dosages throughout
the study. Medications that would interfere with study measurements
were tapered off for a minimum of three half-lives prior to collection.
Case adjudication
Clinical information from the visit was compiled and reviewed by a
Case Adjudication panel. Adjudicators were all recognized clinical
experts in ME/CFS (Lucinda Bateman, Andy Kogelnik, Anthony
Komaroff, Benjamin Natelson, Daniel Peterson). Each adjudicator
performed their own independent review to assign both ME/CFS case
status and temporality of ME/CFS onset to an infection. When dis-
crepancies arose between adjudicators, a case adjudication meeting
was convened. Adjudicators had to unanimously agree that a partici-
pant developed ME/CFS after a documented infection for a case to be
considered adjudicated and included in the analyses. Positively adju-
dicated participants were alsoinvited to return for an additional 10-day
long exercise stress visit.
To be considered an adjudicated case, participants were required
to be unanimously considered to be a case of PI-ME/CFS by the pro-
tocol’s adjudication committee, meet at least one of three ME/CFS
criteria (1994 Fukuda Criteria64, 2003 Canadian Consensus Criteria for
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome65, or the Insti-
tute of Medicine Diagnostic Criteria66), have moderate to severe clin-
ical symptom severity as determined by having a Multidimensional
Fatigue Inventory (MFI) score of ≥13 on the general fatigue subscale or
≥10 on the reduced activity subscale, and functional impairment as
determined by having a Short-Form 36 (SF-36) score of ≤70 on physical
function subscale, or ≤50 on role physical subscale, or ≤75 on social
function subscale.
Life narratives and qualitative interviews
Detailed life narratives and qualitative interviews were conducted to
understand the lived experience of PI-ME/CFS, the context of the life it
occurred in, and to capture the point-in-time experience of post-
exertional malaise. Participants had a life narrative collected by a study
investigator, an interview about the impact of PI-ME/CFS by an occu-
pational therapist, and up to 10 brief semi-structured qualitative
interviews that were developed based on data collected from a pre-
paratory focus group study34. Evocative quotes from the transcripts
were selected by the investigators to give a patient voice to match the
ﬁndings reported.
Performance validity testing
Symptom validity tests were administered to determine if subjective
reporting was consistent within individuals, to identify atypical
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
15

patterns of responding, and to relate these measures to population
norms. Performance validity tests were administered to determine
whether neuropsychological test performances completed during the
study were responded to validly, that is, they reﬂect neurocognitive
functioning and are not unduly impacted by non-cognitive factors,
such as poor engagement in testing. These tests include: Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory – 2 Restructured Form (MPI2-RF):
examinees have to complete true-false items that best describes
themselves and was scored using various empirically-derived validity
indices;67 B Test: examinees have to rapidly discriminate between let-
ter stimuli;68 Dot Counting Test: examinees have to count dots as
rapidly as possible;69 Word Memory Test: a task where examinees have
to view words and later remember them70.
Patient reported outcomes measures
The following symptom and health questionnaires were adminis-
tered. Short-Form 36 (SF-36): a standard measure of health-related
quality of life outcomes that has been tested and validated extensively
in a number of clinical populations;71 CDC Symptom Inventory (CDC-
SI): collects information on occurrence, frequency, and intensity of
symptoms common in ME/CFS and other fatiguing illnesses;72 Multi-
dimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI): a validated 20-item self-report
instrument designed to measure fatigue severity;73 Patient Reported
Outcomes Measurement Information System—Short Forms (PROMIS-
SF): a system of highly reliable, precise measures of patient–reported
health status for physical, mental, and social wellbeing. PROMIS forms
administered included Fatigue, Pain Behavior, Pain Interference, Pain
Intensity, Global Health, Emotional Distress—Anxiety, Emotional Dis-
tress- Depression, Sleep-Related Impairment and Sleep Disturbances;74
The McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ): a list of 20 groups of adjectives
to describe sensory, affective and evaluative aspects of pain;75 The
Neuropathic Pain Scale (NPS): a questionnaire designed to assess the
quality and the intensity of the neuropathic sensations;76 Poly-
symptomatic Distress Scale: a self-administered instrument that
determines both the distribution of painful areas across the body and
an estimate of related symptom burden that can be used to deﬁne
ﬁbromyalgia;77 Patient Health Questionnaire-15 (PHQ-15): a validated
questionnaire used to assess somatic symptom severity and the
potential presence of somatization and somatoform disorders;78
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI): a measure of sleep quality over a
1-month period;79 Fatigue Catastrophizing Scale: a measure of cata-
strophizing related to the fatigue experience;80 The Multiple Ability
Self-Report Questionnaire (MASQ): a questionnaire that assesses the
subjective appraisal of cognitive difﬁculties in ﬁve cognitive domains:
language, visual-perceptual ability, verbal memory, visual-spatial
memory, and attention/concentration;81 and Belief about Emotions
scale: A validated questionnaire designed to measure the beliefs
regarding expressing negative thoughts and feelings82.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging
MRI was obtained on a 3.0 tesla Philips Achieva device. Sequences
performed precontrast were 2D axial proton density-and T2-weighted,
15 direction diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) with b = 1000 DTI. 3D
sagittal T1 magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo
(MPRAGE), and T2 weighted ﬂuid attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) with approximately 1 mm isotropic resolution. Gadolinium
based contrast agent was injected slowly over approximately one
minute while high resolution 0.55 isotropic susceptibility weighted
imaging was obtained. Following this post contrast images were
obtained using 3D sagittal T1 fast ﬁeld echo (FFE) and T2 Weighted
FLAIR techniques. DTI data was processed to generate diffusion
weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC)
images. Scans were evaluated in duplicate. A neuroradiologist and a
neurologist performed separate evaluations. Differences in inter-
pretation were resolved through consultation.
Small ﬁber density measures
Two 3-mm excisional skin biopsies were collected from the distal thigh
and distal leg. Samples were ﬁxed, sectioned and immunostained for
the panaxonal marker PGP9.5 by free-ﬂoating immunohistochemistry.
Four skin sections from each biopsy were randomly selected, immu-
nostained, and mounted on a single slide and epidermal nerve ﬁbers
were visualized with confocal microscopy. This method provides an
accurate representation of the biopsy sample while avoiding sampling
error83. A diagnosis of small ﬁber sensory neuropathy is given based
upon a length-dependent loss of epidermal nerve ﬁbers.
Measures of brain injury
Plasma and cerebrospinal ﬂuid were analyzed for markers of brain
injury by immunoassay using digital array technology, which uses a
single molecule enzyme-linked immunoarray (Simoa) method84. The
Neurology 4-Plex A platform for Nf-L, Tau, GFAP, and UCH-L1 was used.
In brief, paramagnetic capture beads coated with each relevant anti-
body, and a biotinylated detector for each relevant antibody are
combined. Antibody coated paramagnetic capture beads and labeled
biotinylated detector antibody bind to the relevant molecules present
in the sample. Following a washing step, a conjugate of streptavidin-
beta-galactosidase (SBG) is mixed with the capture beads. The cap-
tured molecules become enzymatically labeled when the SBG binds to
the biotinylated detector antibodies. A second wash is performed, and
the
capture
beads
are
resuspended
in
a
resoruﬁn
beta-D-
galactopyranoside (RGP) substrate solution. This suspension is trans-
ferred to the Simoa Disc. Individual paramagnetic capture beads settle
into 216,000 femtoliter-sized microwells designed to hold no more
than one bead per well. The beads are sealed into the microwells while
excess beads are sealed into the microwells while excess beads are
washed away with a synthetic ﬂuorinated polymer sealing oil. If the
measured molecule is present in the sample and subsequently cap-
tured and labeled, the beta-galactosidase hydrolyzes the RGP sub-
strate and produces a ﬂuorescent signal. This signal is detected and
counted by the Simoa optical system. The concentrations of relevant
molecules are interpolated from a standard curve.
Clinical laboratory measurements of blood and
cerebrospinal ﬂuid
The following panel of laboratory evaluations were performed on
collected blood samples: acute care panel, mineral panel, hepatic
panel, complete blood count with differential, prothrombin time,
international normalized ratio, partial thromboplastin time, thyroid
stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, triiodothyronine, iron, ferritin,
transferrin saturation, fasting lipid panel, hemoglobin A1c, anti-nuclear
antibody, Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated antibody, anti-
Smith antibody, anti-RNP, ssA, ssB, vitamin B12, 25(OH) vitamin D,
1,25(OH)2 vitamin D, folate, creatine kinase, c-reactive protein, ery-
throcyte sedimentation rate, d-dimer, quantitative immunoglobulins,
ﬂow cytometry for lymphocyte subsets, human immunodeﬁciency
virus by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Epstein-Barr virus and
Cytomegalovirus by polymerase chain reaction, Epstein-Barr anti-
bodies, C6 peptide antibodies, hepatitis panel, rapid plasma regain,
and tryptase level.
Heavy metal screening was performed on urine samples collected
over 24-hours in a CLIA certiﬁed laboratory using inductively-coupled
plasma/mass spectrometry (ICP/MS).
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples were analyzed for cell counts, glu-
cose, protein, and oligoclonal bands.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid ICP-MS (inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectroscopy)
ICP-MS is an analytical technique by which concentrations of elements
are determined up to as low as ppt (parts per trillion) levels in liquid,
solid or gaseous samples. Elements are led through a plasma source
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
16

where the atomic forms of elements become ionized. These ions are
then detected according to their masses.
Total iron concentrations in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples were
measured by ICP-MS (Agilent model 7900). For each sample, 200 µL of
concentrated trace-metal-grade nitric acid (Fisher) was added to
200 µL of sample taken in a 15 mL Falcon tube. Tubes were sealed with
electrical tape to prevent evaporation, taken inside a 1 L glass beaker,
and then placed at 90 °C oven. After overnight digestion, each sample
was diluted to a total volume of 4 mL with deionized water, and then
analyzed by ICP-MS.
Dietary evaluation
Participants completed the Diet History Questionnaire (DHQII), an
internet-based survey that asks 134 questions regarding dietary intake
over the past year and eight questions about dietary supplement
intake. Participants kept seven-day food records, which were reviewed
by nutrition staff and coded into Nutrition Data Systems for Research
(NDSR) software to obtain nutrient intake data.
Medication reconciliation
Medication and supplement use were collected during the history and
physical exam.
Sleep measurements
PI-ME/CFS participants each had a standard clinical polysomnogram to
evaluate for obstructive sleep apnea, periodic limb movements, and
sleep fragmentation.
Heart rate variability
Standard three-lead ambulatory ECG monitors were used for 24-h
recordings. All data were downloaded on-site and reviewed by ECG
telemetry nurses and by a pediatric cardiologist with clinical electro-
physiology training. The recorded data was analyzed using Spacelabs
Impresario (version 3.07.0158) program. Arrhythmia and non-normal
beats were detected, coded appropriately and excluded from sub-
sequent HRV analysis. Tracings were reviewed for electrical and
mechanical noise artifact and these portions of tracings were similarly
excluded from subsequent analysis. Recordings with less than 22 h of
data were excluded.
Orthostatic challenge
Participants were ﬁtted with electrodes to measure cardiac signals and
electrical impedance, a respiratory belt, a pulse oximeter, a ﬁnger-cuff
for beat-to-beat blood pressure measurements, an automated blood
pressure cuff, and a forearm plethysmograph transducer paired with a
rapid-inﬂation brachial cuff for forearm blood ﬂow measurements.
Prior to the orthostatic challenge, baseline hemodynamic mea-
sures and a blood sample were collected. The participant was then
tilted head-up at a 70-degree angle. The orthostatic challenge was
continued for 40 min, with hemodynamic information collected in real
time and blood samples collected at four minute intervals. The
orthostatic challenge was ended if a participant developed hemody-
namic instability or acute symptoms. On completion of the orthostatic
challenge, the participant was returned to a supine position for 10 min,
at which time ﬁnal hemodynamic and blood measures were made.
Baroreﬂex function measurements
Participants were ﬁtted with electrodes to measure cardiac signals and
electrical impedance, a respiratory belt, a pulse oximeter, a ﬁnger-cuff
for beat-to-beat blood pressure measurements, an automated blood
pressure cuff, and a forearm plethysmograph transducer paired with a
rapid-inﬂation brachial cuff for forearm blood ﬂow measurements.
Deep breathing measures were collected with the participant supine
breathing deeply at a rate of ﬁve to six breaths per minute for three
minutes. Three or more Valsalva maneuvers were then performed,
during which the participants blow against resistance for 12 s at
30 mmHg and then relaxes. For participants where a square wave
phenomenon was observed, the participant was tilted at 20 degrees
head up and the procedure repeated.
Cerebrospinal catechol measurements
Cerebrospinal levels of catechols were assayed by batch alumina
extraction followed by liquid chromatography with series electro-
chemical detection as reported previously85,86. In summary, to freshly
thawed CSF in a plastic sample tube, approximately 5 mg of acid
washed alumina, internal standard, and TRIS/EDTA buffer were added
for alumina adsorption of the catechols. The tube was shaken vigor-
ously using a paint can shaker for about 20 min. The tube was then
spun in a microfuge, the alumina forming a pellet at the bottom of the
tube. The supernatant was removed, and the alumina was washed
twice. Then, after removal of the supernatant, 100 µL of an acidic
eluting solution was added to the tube for desorbing the catechols
from the alumina. The tube was shaken in a vortex mixer and then
centrifuged. The supernatant was removed manually using a pipette
and transferred to a microvial and placed in the carousel of the auto-
mated injector. For most samples 90 µL was injected onto the liquid
chromatography column. The column eluate was passed through 3
electrodes in series, the ﬁrst set at an oxidizing potential and the third
set at a reducing potential. The electrochemical signal from the
reducing electrode was recorded using proprietary software, peak
heights of compounds with retention times of interest were measured,
and concentrations of analytes in units of pg/mL were tabulated in a
spreadsheet using a macro after adjustment for analytical recovery of
the internal standard. For reporting purposes concentration in pmol/
mL were used.
Psychiatric evaluation
The following psychological inventories were administered: Compo-
site International Diagnostic Interview Trauma Section (CIDI-Trauma):
a
validated
survey
that
characterizes
a
participant’s
previous
traumatic experiences;87 Post-traumatic Stress Diagnostic Scale (PDS):
a validated instrument for the epidemiologic diagnosis of Post-
traumatic
Stress
Disorder;88
Childhood
Trauma
Questionnaire
Short Form (CTQ-SF): a validated instrument that characterizes
potential traumatic life experiences in early childhood;89 Sexual and
Physical Abuse Questionnaire (SPAQ): a validated questionnaire that
characterizes the type and age of occurrence of traumatic life
experiences;90 Beck Depression Inventory –II (BDI-II): a validated self-
report inventory for measuring the severity of depression;91 Beck
Anxiety Inventory (BAI): a validated self-report inventory for measur-
ing the severity of anxiety92 Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale—Revised (CESD-R): A validated self-report inventory
for screening for depression; Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory – 2 Restructured Form (MMPI2-RF): examinees have to
complete true-false items that best describe themselves; Structured
Clinical Interview—DSM 5 (SCID-5): History of current and past psy-
chiatric diagnosis was assessed with the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-5, Research Version (SCID-5-RV).
Body composition measurements
Weight (Scale-Tronix 5702 digital balance, Carol Stream, IL, USA) and
height (Seca 242 stadiometer, Hanover, MD, USA) were taken at fasted
conditions. Body composition, including body fat mass, lean soft tis-
sue mass, and fat percentage was measured by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (iDXA scanner with Encore 15.0 software; GE Health-
care, Madison, WI, USA).
Mitochondrial extracellular ﬂux testing
Mitochondrial function was assessed in PBMC that were isolated and
measured within three hours of being collected using an extracellular
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
17

ﬂux assay (Mito Stress Test, Agilent)93. In brief, PBMCs were isolated
from 8 ml of blood. Samples were centrifuged at 1,750 × g for 30 min at
room temperature. The cloudy layer was transferred to a 15 mL conical
tube where 15 mL of PBS was added and inverted ﬁve times. The
sample was then centrifuged at 300 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. After dis-
carding the supernatant, the pellet was re-suspended by adding 10 mL
PBS and inverting ﬁve times. The sample was then centrifuged at
300 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. After discarding the supernatant, the cells
were re-suspended in 1 mL PBS and centrifuged at 610 × g for 10 min.
After removing the supernatant, the pellet was re-suspended in com-
plete RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, 10 mM Penicillin/
Streptomycin. Cell plates were coated with tissue adhesive solution
after diluting the stock solution in 0.1 M sodium bicarbonate pH
8.0 solution. 100 µL of the diluted solution was added to each well and
incubated for 20 min at room temperature, washed with deionized
water and air dried. On the day of the experiment, fresh assay media
was prepared by adding L-glutamine, pyruvate, and glucose to base
media (the same constituents as Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle’s Medium
(DMEM), but without any sodium bicarbonate, glucose, glutamine, or
sodium pyruvate) to make assay media and warmed to 37 °C and
adjusted to a pH of 7.4. PBMCs were plated into each well to reach
80–90% conﬂuency. Plates were centrifuged at 200 × g for 2 min, then
washed with assay media. 180 µL of assay media was then added to
each well and incubated in a non-CO2 37 °C incubator for 60 min prior
to performing the extraceullar ﬂux assay according to manufacturer’s
directions. Assay Results of the assay were normalized to amount of
live cells in the cell preparation93.
ATP 9.4 characterization of muscle
Samples were collected from the vastus lateralis muscle and ﬂash
frozen. Frozen sections of muscle samples were prepared with cryo-
stat, 10um thickness. Six slides of frozen sections were taken to Johns
Hopkins University, Neurology department, Neuromuscular Labora-
tory for ATPase pH 9.4 stain, which can identify Type II muscle ﬁbers.
The calcium method for myosin-ATPase demonstration, employ-
ing solutions of different pH values, has been used primarily to dis-
tinguish muscle ﬁber types. Muscle ﬁbers may be broadly categorized
as type I (slow, red muscle, oxidative) and type II (fast, white muscle,
glycolytic). Type II muscle ﬁbers are further subdivided as IIa (glyco-
lytic), IIb (glycolytic/oxidative), and IIc which may be ﬁbers that are
changing types due to disease, injury, or development. The pre-
incubation pH relatively inactivates the myosin-ATPase iso-enzyme
characteristic of speciﬁc ﬁber types. The remaining active ATP and
calcium-dependent enzyme activity releases calcium atoms which are
replaced by cobalt, and ﬁnally precipitated as a black insoluble cobalt
salt of ammonium sulﬁde. Slides were scanned at National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS) Light
Image department and images, 2.5X size, were acquired using
NDP.view2 software from Hamamatsu.
Analysis of images was performed using Fiji (Image J) in a semi-
automated way to facilitate the evaluation of cross-sectioned myoﬁ-
bers in the largest possible area for each image. Preprocessing and
thresholding of the images using Fiji available ﬁlters and tools was ﬁrst
done to generate a selection of muscle ﬁbers and to classify them
according to the intensity of the staining; however, the accuracy of this
evaluation was limited, and human intervention was required during
the analysis. Following automatic ﬁber selection, a researcher blinded
to sample identity modiﬁed the selection of ﬁbers to exclude regions
of the image where ﬁbers were longitudinal or where the sample
quality was suboptimal. In addition, ﬁber segmentation was manually
corrected to properly delineate a region of interest for each ﬁber
where automatic delimitation was not accurate. Similarly, automatic
classiﬁcation of the ﬁbers was manually reviewed. The minimum Feret
diameter was measured for each ﬁber, and the median of the mea-
surements for type I and type II ﬁbers in each image was calculated and
used to compute a Type II/Type I ratio to assess the relative ﬁber size
for the image.
Mitochondrial genetic analysis
Samples were collected from the vastus lateralis muscle and ﬂash
frozen. Sample analysis was performed by GeneDx.
Genomic DNA was extracted from the specimens. For the nuclear
genome, the DNA is enriched for the complete coding regions and
splice junctions of the genes on this panel using a proprietary targeted
capture system developed by GeneDx for next-generation sequencing
with CNV calling (NGS-CNV). The enriched targets were simultaneously
sequenced with paired end reads on an Illumina platform. Bi-
directional sequence reads were then assembled and aligned to
reference sequences based on NCBI RefSeq transcripts and human
genome build GRCh37/UCSC hg19. After gene speciﬁc ﬁltering, data
were analyzed to identify sequence variants and most deletions and
duplications involving coding exons; however, technical limitations
and inherent sequence properties effectively reduce this resolution for
some genes. Alternative sequencing or copy number detection meth-
ods were used to analyze regions with inadequate sequence or copy
number data by NGS. The entire mitochondrial genome from the
submitted sample was also ampliﬁed and sequenced using Next Gen-
eration sequencing. DNA sequence was assembled and analyzed in
comparison with the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS
GeneBank number NC_012920) and the reported variants listed in the
MITOMAP
database
(http://www.mitomap.org).
Next
generation
sequencing may not detect large-scale mtDNA deletions present at 5%
heteroplasmy or lower or mtDNA point variants present at 1.5% het-
eroplasmy or lower. Reportable variants include pathogenic variants,
likely pathogenic variants and variants of uncertain signiﬁcance. Likely
benign and benign variants, if present, were not reported. For the
nuclear genome, the technical sensitivity of sequencing is estimated to
be >99% at detecting single nucleotide events. It will not reliably detect
deletions greater than 20 base pairs, insertions or rearrangements
greater than 10 base pairs, or low-level mosaicism. The copy number
assessment methods used with this test cannot reliably detect copy
number variants of less than 500 base pairs or mosaicism and cannot
identify balanced chromosome aberrations. Assessment of exon-level
copy number events is dependent on the inherent sequence properties
of the targeted regions, including shared homology and exon size. Due
to the presence of non-functional pseudogenes, regions of the GYG2,
NR2F1, PDSS1, and TSFM, and genes are not fully sequenced by this
method. For the COQ7, COX8A, HTRA2, NDUFB11, RNASEH1, SCO2,
SDHA, SLC25A26, SLC25A46, TFAM, TMEM126B, and TRMT10C genes,
sequencing but not deletion/duplication analysis was performed. In
addition, the COA5 gene deletion/duplication analysis may only be
able to detect full gene events. For the mitochondrial genome, next
generation sequencing can detect mtDNA point variants as low as 1.5%
heteroplasmy and large-scale deletions (2 kb or larger) as low as 5%
heteroplasmy. However, for large-scale mtDNA deletions observed at
less than 15% heteroplasmy, a quantitative value will not be provided.
This test is expected to detect greater than 98% of known pathogenic
variants and deletions of the mitochondrial genome.
The mitochondrial variants identiﬁed by GeneDx were annotated
using Annovar94.
Modiﬁed effort expenditure for rewards task
The Effort-Expenditure for Rewards Task15 is a multi-trial game in which
participants were offered a choice between two task difﬁculty levels
for a reward (Supplementary Fig. S5A). The task began with a one
second blank screen, followed by a ﬁve second choice period in which
the participant was informed of the value of the reward and the
probability of winning if the task were completed successfully. After
the participant chose the task, another one second blank screen was
displayed. Next, the participant either completed 30 button presses in
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
18

seven seconds with the dominant index ﬁnger if they chose the easy
task, or 98 button presses in 21 s using the non-dominant little ﬁnger if
they chose the hard task. Next, the participant received feedback on
whether they completed the task successfully. Finally, the participant
learned if they have won, based upon the probability of winning and
the successful completion of the task. This process repeats in its
entirety for 15 min.
Participants were told at the beginning of the game that they
would win the dollar amount they received from two of their winning
tasks, chosen at random by the computer program (range of total
winnings is $2.00–$8.42).
The primary measure of the EEfRT task is Proportion of Hard Task
Choices (effort preference). This behavioral measure is the ratio of the
number of times the hard task was selected compared to the number
of times the easy task was selected. This metric is used to estimate
effort preference, the decision to avoid the harder task when decision-
making is unsupervised and reward values and probabilities of
receiving a reward are standardized.
Actigraphy
Participants were instructed to wear ActiGraph GT3X+ accelerometers
(ActiGraph Inc., Pensacola, FL, USA) on their waist and non-dominant
wrist, continuously, for at least seven consecutive days at home. Raw
tri-axial accelerometer data was recorded at 80 samples/second and
subsequently ﬁltered and aggregated into one-minute vector magni-
tude activity counts and steps with Actilife software (v6.13.0, Acti-
Graph, Pensacola, FL, USA) and customized programs in Matlab
(R2021b, Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). Periods of sixty or more con-
secutive minutes of zero vector magnitude counts were identiﬁed as
non-wear, and daily data were considered valid if the device was worn
for ≥10 h from 12 midnight to 12 midnight the next day95. Minutes
where activity counts of the vertical axis of the waist-worn accel-
erometer fell between 2020 and 5998 were identiﬁed as moderate
intensity activity, i.e., three to six times the resting metabolism.
Grip strength
Grip strength was measured with a hand-held dynamometer (Jamar).
Each hand was tested individually with the arm, forearm, and wrist in a
neutral position. First, each participant was instructed to exert a
maximum possible grip force for about ﬁve seconds. After completing
the ﬁrst reading, this maximal grip task was repeated. After a minute of
rest, the participant was asked to maintain their maximal grip for as
long as possible. The time elapsed when the participant’s grip force
reduced to 50% of their maximum was recorded by an investigator. All
three tests were then repeated with the other hand.
Electrophysiology and repetitive grip testing
To assess physical fatigue, a grip force task was designed which
required participants to try to maintain their grip at 50% of maximum
voluntary contraction (MVC) in successive blocks of 30 s interspaced
with 30 s rest blocks. Each participant sat with their right forearm
placed in a rigid-frame dynamometer (biopac, Goleta, CA, USA). The
MVC was set as the highest value of three squeezes.
Electromyography (EMG) was collected using surface electrodes
(3 M, St. Paul, MN, USA) over the ﬂexor and extensor carpi radialis
(FCR, ECR) muscles and the abductor pollicis brevis (APB), using
ampliﬁers
and
software
from
Cambridge
Electronic
Design,
Cambridge, UK.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) was performed to probe
the excitability of the primary motor cortex (m1) via motor evoked
potentials (MEPs). A 70 mm ﬁgure-8 coil was used to determine the
optimal position for evoking MEPs by holding the coil tangential to the
scalp and slightly displacing it until the highest MEP amplitude was
recorded in the APB muscle. The positions of the participant’s head
and TMS coil were tracked with a neuronavigation system (rogue
Research, Cambridge, MA, USA) in order to maintain the stimulation
position over the hotspot. The TMS Input-Output curve was recorded,
collecting MEP responses for intensities 5–100%, in increments of 5%,
of stimulation output, in order to calculate the S50. The S50 value was
deﬁned as 50% of maximum MEP amplitude. This curve value was also
used to estimate resting motor threshold (rMT), which was conﬁrmed
using single pulse TMS as the stimulation intensity that would evoke a
~50 µV response in roughly 50% of pulses delivered.
The maximum M-wave was also determined prior and after the
repetitive grip task by applying electrical stimulation over the nerve
innervating the FCR muscle.
During the repetitive grip task, each participant repeatedly per-
formed 30-s periods of isometric muscle contractions aiming at 50% of
MVC. Generally, participants performed 16 blocks, but some quit ear-
lier, and some continued for up to 32 blocks. After each squeeze block,
there was a 30 s period of rest. During this rest period, MEPs (elicited
every ﬁve seconds) were measured.
The development of muscular fatigue during the task, deﬁned as
the inability to maintain at least 40% MVC force for more than three
seconds, was analyzed by comparing the 1st block (no fatigue), the last
block before fatigue onset, and three following blocks after fatigue
onset or, if they did not fatigue, the last four blocks. For EMG, we used
the Dimitrov index (DI)17,18 to evaluate the shift in EMG frequency
power within blocks.
Functional MRI repetitive grip testing
Brain activity was also assessed during the grip strength task with fMRI.
This task was designed to identify, at the whole brain level, brain areas
involved in fatigue. Participants lay supine in the scanner and per-
formed repeated 30-s blocks of grip strength with a dynamometer
(isometric muscle contractions) at 50% of their maximum voluntary
contraction (MVC) interspaced with 30-s blocks of rest. MVC of the
forearm muscles was determined from the best of three brief squeezes
on the dynamometer. Participants used visual feedback from a com-
puter to monitor force generation. Similar to the TMS study, partici-
pants performed 16 blocks, but some quit earlier, and some continued
for up to 32 blocks. Subjective appraisals of muscular fatigue were
measured with a VAS before and after the grip strength task.
We used a 3 T Prisma SIEMENS scanner equipped with a 64-
channel head-coil in the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center at the
National Institutes of Health. We acquired T2*-weighted EPI with TR =
2 s, TE = 30 ms, image matrix = 64 × 64, ﬂip angle: 70˚, FoV: 100, voxel
size 3.5 ×3.5 ×3.5 mm.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)
CPET was performed using a cycle ergometer and a computerized
metabolic cart (CardiO2 Ultima; MedGraphics Corp, St.Paul, MN, USA).
A ramp protocol was used where the work rate would be gradually
increased until volitional fatigue was reached by each participant. A
time-matching paradigm to ensure all participants exercised for
between eight to twelve minutes was employed, as per American
College of Sports Medicine recommendations96. The target endpoint
was exertional intolerance deﬁned as the participants’ expressed
desire to stop cycling despite strong verbal encouragement from the
testing staff. Endpoints for stopping the tests were those recom-
mended by the American College of Sports Medicine96.
Breath-by-breath gas exchange and heart rate (by 12-lead ECG)
were measured throughout the CPET. Peak oxygen consumption (peak
VO2) was calculated as the 20 s average at the end of the CPET. The
anaerobic threshold (AT) identiﬁed by the metabolic cart was veriﬁed
by gas exchange analysis methods22. Chronotropic incompetence (CI)
was calculated as % predicted heart rate reserve = [peak HR−resting
HR]/[APMHR−resting HR] × 100. The slope of the heart rate response
during the CPET was examined by linear ﬁt between 15 to 100% of the
CPET time. Expected heart rate responses were also generated using
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
19

linear ﬁts between predicted resting and peak heart rate values,
matching sex and age of both HV and PI-ME/CFS participants. Muscle
oxygenation measurements were also made at the vastus lateralis
during the CPET by near infrared spectroscopy (NIRO-200NX, Hama-
matsu Photonics, Japan). For further determination of maximal oxy-
genation values of near infrared spectroscopy measurements, a thigh
occlusion test was performed prior to the CPET. Following seated rest,
an occlusion cuff (Hokanson Rapid Cuff Inﬂator; Hokanson Inc., Bel-
leview, WA, USA) was rapidly inﬂated to and held at 80 mmHg above
systolic blood pressure for eight minutes.
Bioenergetic measurements
The metabolic chamber is a whole-room indirect calorimeter that
allows detailed assessment of energy and nutrient balance. Measure-
ments are conducted at stable interior (room) temperature, humidity,
and barometric pressure, which are continuously measured. Airtight
sampling ports and a four-way air-locking food and specimen passage
are designed to allow blood draws and specimen retrievals with
minimal disturbance to the chamber environment. Outside air is con-
tinuously drawn into the chamber, and the ﬂow rate of air at the outlet
is measured using a pneumotachograph with a differential man-
ometer. A fraction of the extracted air is analyzed at one minute
intervals for O2 and CO2 concentrations with a thermomagnetic O2
analyzer. This allows for a continuous assessment of oxygen con-
sumption (V˙O2), carbon dioxide elimination (V˙CO2), and calculation
of overall energy expenditure (EE). The ratio between V˙CO2 and V˙O2
(the respiratory quotient [RQ]) reﬂects preference for carbohydrate or
fat oxidation.
Starting the day prior to CPET, each participant was placed on a
metabolic diet controlled for energy and macronutrient content.
Measures of energy expenditure and respiratory exchange were
obtained during a 16 h (4 pm to 8 am) stay in a metabolic chamber
prior to CPET and for three consecutive days afterwards.
Salivary cortisol measurements
Saliva was collected using a SARSTEDT salivette. Participants did not
eat for at least 2 h or drink water 30 min prior to collection. Samples
were centrifuged for 2 min at 1000 × g and then frozen at −80 °C.
Samples were measured by Salimetrics using enzyme-linked immu-
noassays for cortisol performed in duplicate. Assay sensitivity is
<0.007 ug/dL.
Neuropsychological Measures
The following neuropsychological measures were administered by a
trained neuropsychometrist in the following general order: Visual
Analogue Scale (Time 1): a set of scales that were administered to
capture subjective effort, performance, mental fatigue, and physical
fatigue. This test was immediately prior to administration of the neu-
ropsychological testing battery; Wechsler Test of Adult Reading
(WTAR) (The Psychological Corporation, 2001): a task that requires the
examinee to read words aloud;97 Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised
Learn (HVLT-R Learn): a task where examinees have to learn a list of
words;98 Grooved Pegboard Test: a task where examinees have to
rapidly insert pegs in holes;99 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale—
Fourth Edition (WAIS-IV) subtests including Coding, Symbol Search
and Digit Span: a task where examinees memorize strings of numbers
or complete speeded tasks involving unfamiliar symbols;100 B Test:
examinees have to rapidly discriminate between letter stimuli;68 Hop-
kins Verbal Learning Test-Revised Delayed Recall (HVLT-R DR): a task
where examinees have to recall the list of words previously learned;98
Brief Visual Memory Test-Revised (BVMT-R): a task where examinees
have to learn a list of designs;101 Visual Analogue Scale (Time 2): scales
to capture subjective effort, performance, mental fatigue, and physical
fatigue were collected at this time, approximately one hour after
testing started; Wisconsin Card Sort Test (WCST-64): a task where
examinees have to utilize corrective feedback to learn how to sort
cards;102 Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT; FAS and
Animals): a task where examinees have to generate words to various
cues;103 Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT): a task where
examinees have to rapidly perform serial addition;104 Brief Visual
Memory Test-Revised (BVMT-R) Delayed Recall: a task where exam-
inees have to recall the prior list of designs;101 Word Memory Test: a
task where examinees have to view words;70 Test of Variables of
Attention: a task where examinees rapidly respond using a button
press to certain target stimuli and not distractor stimuli;105 Visual
Analogue Scale (Time 3): scales to capture subjective effort, perfor-
mance, mental fatigue, and physical fatigue were collected at this time,
approximately two hours after testing started; Word Memory Test
Delayed Recall:a task where examinees have to recall the words viewed
earlier;70 Dot Counting Test: examinees haveto count dots as rapidly as
possible;69 MMPI-−2 RF: As described above; EEfRT test: As described
above; Visual Analogue Scale (Time 4): scales to capture subjective
effort, performance, mental fatigue, and physical fatigue were col-
lected at this time, approximately three hours after testing started.
PBMC RNA sequencing
RNA was extracted from PBMC’s of participants using miRNeasy Micro
Kit (QIAGEN). RNA was quantiﬁed using Qubit 3.0 ﬂuorometer
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and its integrity conﬁrmed using an Agilent
2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Dual index libraries were
constructed with at least one unique index per each patient library
using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA HT Kit (Illumina) to enable
subsequent pooling of equal quantities of individual libraries. The
integrity and ratio of pooled libraries was validated using Miseq system
(Illumina); then, paired-end sequencing (2 × 75 base pairs (bp)) was
performed on an HiSeq 3000 sequencer (Illumina) with the Illumina
HiSeq 3000 SBS Hit.
Proteomics
Peripheral blood serum was isolated using SST tubes and cryopre-
served with corresponding cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples. Proteomic
analysis used the SOMAscan 1.3k Assay (SomaLogic). This is an
aptamer-based assay able to detect 1305 protein analytes, optimized
for analysis of human serum106,107. Brieﬂy, aptamers are short single-
stranded DNA sequences modiﬁed to confer speciﬁc binding to target
proteins and can be highly multiplexed for discovery of biomarker
signatures. The proteins quantiﬁed include cytokines, hormones,
growth factors, receptors, kinases, proteases, protease inhibitors, and
structural proteins. The assay was performed according to manu-
facturer speciﬁcations for each of the serum and cerebrospinal ﬂuid
sample types. Brieﬂy, serum samples were assayed at three dilutions
(40%, 1%, and 0.005%) with each sample dilution added to a corre-
sponding subset of the 1305 SOMAmer detection reagents binned
according to manufacturer’s predicted target abundance in serum.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid was run at a single 15% concentration dilution with
protease inhibitors and polyanionic competitor reagent added. Data
was then inspected using a web tool and subjected to quality control
procedures as previously described108,109.
Flow cytometry of blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid
EDTA-treated whole blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid cells were used for
ﬂow cytometric analysis. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples were obtained by
lumbar puncture and the cerebrospinal cells were collected within an
hour by centrifugation. Whole blood or cerebrospinal ﬂuid cells were
stained with CD3, CD4, CD8, CD14, CD16, CD19, CD25, CD27, CD45,
CD45RA, CD56, CD152, CXCR5, IgD, HLA-DR (all from BD Biosciences),
PD-1 (BioLegend) and FoxP3 (eBiosciences), as previously described110.
All ﬂow cytometric analysis was performed using an LSR II (BD
Biosciences). The data were analyzed using FlowJo 10.6 software
(FlowJo LLC).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
20

An additional panel of T-cell markers including TIGIT, CD244, and
CD226 were performed on a subset of participants. Some of these
samples were collected from participants during a second lumbar
puncture during a return visit months after the initial sample collected
for the analysis above.
All antibodies, clones, catalog numbers, manufacturers, and
dilutions used in this study are as follows: anti-human CD3 (clone:
UCHT1, Cat. 558117, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for
CSF cells)) anti-human CD3 (clone: UCHT1, Cat. 555335, BD Bios-
ciences, 1:100 dilution); anti-human CD4 (clone: RPA-T4, Cat. 557922,
BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human
CD4 (clone: RPA-T4, Cat. 555346, BD Biosciences, 1:100 dilution); anti-
human CD8 (clone: SK1, Cat. 341051, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution
(1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human CD8 (clone: RPA-T8, Cat.
557746, BD Biosciences, 1:100 dilution) anti-human CD14 (clone: M5E2,
Cat. 555399, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF
cells)); anti-human CD16 (clone: 3G8, Cat. 338426, BD Biosciences, 1:30
dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human CD19 (clone: HIB19,
Cat. 555413, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells));
anti-human CD25 (clone: M-A251, Cat. 557741, BD Biosciences, 1:30
dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human CD27 (clone: M-
T271, Cat. 560222, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF
cells)); anti-human CD45 (clone: HI30, Cat. 560777, BD Biosciences,
1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human CD45RA (clone:
HI100, Cat. 555488, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for
CSF cells)) anti-human CD56 (clone: B159, Cat. 557747, BD Biosciences,
1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human CD226 (clone:
11A8, Cat. 338318, BioLegend, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF
cells)); anti-human CD244 (clone: C1.7, Cat. 329522, BioLegend, 1:30
dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human PD-1 (clone:
EH12.2H7, Cat. 329906, BioLegend, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF
cells)); anti-human CXCR5 (clone: RF8B2, Cat. 558113, BD Biosciences,
1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human HLA-DR (clone:
G46-6, Cat. 555811, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution
for CSF cells)); anti-human IgD (clone: IA6-2, Cat. 561302, BD Bios-
ciences, 1:30 dilution (1:100 dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human TIGIT
(clone:
A15153G,
Cat.
372714,
BioLegend,
1:30
dilution
(1:100
dilution for CSF cells)); anti-human CD127 (clone: HIL-7R-M21, Cat.
560551, BD Biosciences, 1:30 dilution); anti-FOXP3 (clone: 236A/E7,
Cat. 17-4777-42, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, 1:50 dilution); anti-human
CD152 (clone: BNI3, Cat. 555853, BD Biosciences, 1:50 dilution); anti-
Stat5 (pY694) (clone: 47/Stat5(pY694), Cat. 612567, BD Biosciences,
1:50 dilution).
Dilutions were determined according to our own staining proto-
cols. All the antibodies used for ﬂow cytometry in this study are
commercially available, and their speciﬁcities have been well validated
by the manufacturers and other users.
NK cell function measurement
NK cell function was measured in blood within 24 h of collection by a
51Chromium release assay111 by the clinical laboratory at Cincinnati
Children’s Hospital.
Growth differentiation factor-15 measurement
The GDF15 ELISA was performed using R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN.
Catalog No. DGD150 kit as per manufacturer instructions. The intra-
assay variation was 1.8–2.8% and the interassay variation was 4.7–5.6%.
Luciferase immunoprecipitation assay
The luciferase immunoprecipitation systems (LIPS) assay provides an
informative tool to explore serology as evidence of autoimmunity and
infectious disease exposure due to its ability to efﬁciently detect
antigenicity antibodies against both conformational and linear epi-
topes. Here, LIPS was used to assess for the presence of autoantibodies
against a small diverse panel of known and potential antigens in the PI-
ME/CFS and healthy volunteer participants. The previously described
testing format was used to examine antibodies against the various
target molecules included known autoimmune-associated proteins
(Ro52, Jo-1, TPO, gastric ATPase, tyrosine hydroxylase), neurological
autoantigens (GAD65, LGI1, NMDAR1, MUSK), cytokines (Interferon
alpha1, Interleukin-6, CXCR4, TGFB1), muscle proteins (MPZ, PMP22),
as well as against several infectious agents (HDV, HEV, Zika virus). Light
units were measured in a Berthold LB 960 Centro luminometer
(Berthold Technologies, Germany) using coelenterazine or furimazine
substrate mix (Promega, Madison, WI). In some cases, control sera
samples from known positive control autoimmune patients were used
as positive controls.
Muscle RNA sequencing
RNA was extracted from muscle samples using the TRIzol protocol112.
The integrity of the RNA was veriﬁed using a standard quality metric
denominated RNA integrity number (RIN) value using the Agilent 4200
TapeStation system and the concentration was measured using the
DeNovix DS-11 spectrophotometer. Five hundred nanograms of RNA
were used to prepare the RNA sequencing libraries using the NEBNext
Ultra II Directional RNA Library Prep Kit and sequenced using the
Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencer. Reads were demultiplexed using
bcl2fastq v. 2.20.0.
Metabolomics of cerebrospinal ﬂuid
Metabolomics on cerebrospinal ﬂuid samples was performed using
Metabolon’s Ultrahigh Performance Liquid Chromatography-Tandem
Mass Spectroscopy (UPLC-MS/MS). Samples were prepared using the
automated MicroLab STAR® system from Hamilton Company. Several
recovery standards were added prior to the ﬁrst step in the extraction
process for QC purposes. To remove protein, dissociate small mole-
cules were bound to protein or trapped in the precipitated protein
matrix, and to recover chemically diverse metabolites, proteins were
precipitated with methanol under vigorous shaking for two minutes
(Glen Mills GenoGrinder 2000) followed by centrifugation. The
resulting extract was divided into ﬁve fractions: two for analysis by two
separate reverse phase (RP)/UPLC-MS/MS methods with positive ion
mode electrospray ionization (ESI), one for analysis by RP/UPLC-MS/
MS with negative ion mode ESI, one for analysis by HILIC/UPLC-MS/MS
with negative ion mode ESI, and one sample was reserved for backup.
Samples were placed brieﬂy on a TurboVap® (Zymark) to remove the
organic solvent. The sample extracts were stored overnight under
nitrogen before preparation for analysis.
All methods utilized a Waters ACQUITY ultra-performance liquid
chromatography (UPLC) and a Thermo Scientiﬁc Q-Exactive high
resolution/accurate mass spectrometer interfaced with a heated elec-
trospray ionization (HESI-II) source and Orbitrap mass analyzer oper-
ated at 35,000 mass resolution. The sample extract was dried then
reconstituted in solvents compatible to each of the four methods. Each
reconstitution solvent contained a series of standards at ﬁxed con-
centrations to ensure injection and chromatographic consistency. One
aliquot was analyzed using acidic positive ion conditions, chromato-
graphically optimized for more hydrophilic compounds. In this
method, the extract was gradient eluted from a C18 column (Waters
UPLC BEH C18-2.1×100 mm, 1.7 µm) using water and methanol, con-
taining 0.05% perﬂuoropentanoic acid (PFPA) and 0.1% formic acid
(FA). Another aliquot was also analyzed using acidic positive ion con-
ditions; however, it was chromatographically optimized for more
hydrophobic compounds. In this method, the extract was gradient
eluted from the same afore-mentioned C18 column using methanol,
acetonitrile, water, 0.05% PFPA and 0.01% FA and was operated at an
overall higher organic content. Another aliquot was analyzed using
basic negative ion optimized conditions using a separate dedicated
C18 column. The basic extracts were gradient eluted from the column
using methanol and water, however, with 6.5 mM Ammonium
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
21

Bicarbonate at pH 8. The fourth aliquot was analyzed via negative
ionization following elution from a HILIC column (Waters UPLC BEH
Amide 2.1 × 150 mm, 1.7 µm) using a gradient consisting of water and
acetonitrile with 10 mM Ammonium Formate, pH 10.8. The MS analysis
alternated between MS and data-dependent MSn scans using dynamic
exclusion. The scan range varied slightly between methods but cov-
ered 70–1000 m/z.
Lipidomics of plasma
The extraction of lipids from plasma was accomplished following
manufacturer’s protocol, with slight modiﬁcations113. To 25 µl of
plasma sample, 975 µl water, 2 ml methanol, 900 µl dichloromethane
(DCM) and 25 µl internal standard was added. The internal standard
was prepared from a kit (Avanti Lipids) developed for the Lipidyzer
platform (SCIEX)114,115. The samples were then vortexed and allowed to
sit at room temperature for 30 min. 1 ml water and 900 µl DCM was
then added and samples were vortexed and centrifuged for 10 min at
2000 × g. The lower organic layer was removed and placed in a sepa-
rate collection tube. To the remaining aqueous layer, 1.8 ml DCM was
added and the samples were vortexed and centrifuged. The lower
organic layer was again removed, added to the previous organic layer,
and stream dried under nitrogen. The lipids were reconstituted in
250 µl running solvent (50/50 methanol/DCM 10 mM ammonium
acetate) and placed in an autosampler vial for analysis. Quality control
(QC) samples and 3 QCs spiked with unlabeled internal standards from
the QC Spike Standards kit (SCIEX) were run at the beginning, middle,
and end of the samples. The quantitation of the lipid species was done
with Lipidomics Workﬂow Manager (SCIEX) 1.0.5.0, which uses vali-
dated DMS-MRM acquisition methods, known internal standard con-
centrations, and integrated peak areas from the samples to determine
the quantity of each lipid species. Lipid species were included in the
data analyses if above the limit of quantiﬁcation in >50% of the
participants.
Microbiome stool sampling procedure
Whole fecal samples were collected in a sterile bowl at the NIH Clinical
Center, aliquoted, and immediately frozen at −80 °C. Aliquots were
sent to the sequencing laboratory for metagenomic and metabolomic
analyses.
Stool microbiome metagenomics
For metagenomic shotgun sequencing, paired-end libraries were pre-
pared from metagenomic DNA using the Illumina Nextera Flex kit, and
then sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq platform with a 2 ×150 bp
length conﬁguration. Bioinformatic analysis of the shotgun metage-
nomic samples was done using the JAMS_BW package, version 1.7.2,
which is available on GitHub at https://github.com/johnmcculloch/
JAMS_BW. All code for every step in the bioinformatic analysis from
reads to plots is publicly available in this package.
Fastqs from each sample were processed with JAMSalpha116,
which, brieﬂy, entails quality trimming and adapter clipping of raw
reads with Trimmomatic 0.36117. The reads were then aligned against
the human genome with Bowtie2 v2.3.2118 and unaligned (non-host)
reads were then assembled using MEGAHIT v1.2.9119. For all samples
evaluated, the mean sequencing depth (already discounting host
reads) was 6.04 Gbp ± 0.79 Gbp, yielding a mean assembly rate of
94.06% ± 1.93%. Assembly contigs smaller than 500 bp were discarded
and taxonomic classiﬁcation of remaining contigs was obtained
through Kraken2120, with a custom 96-Gb Kraken2 database built using
draft and complete genomes of all bacteria,archaea, fungi, viruses, and
protozoa available in the NCBI GenBank in January 2022, in addition to
human and mouse genomes, built using the JAMSbuildk2db tool of the
JAMS package. This JAMS-compatible kraken2 database is available for
download
through
the
URL
https://hpc.nih.gov/~mccullochja/
JAMSdb202201.tar.gz. Functional annotation of contigs was obtained
using Prokka v1.14.6121. The sequencing depth of each contig was
obtained by aligning reads used for assembly back to the contigs.
Taxonomy was expressed as the last known taxon (LKT), being the
taxonomically lowest unambiguous classiﬁcation determined for each
query sequence, using Kraken’s conﬁdence scoring threshold of 5e−06
(using the --conﬁdence parameter). The relative abundance, expressed
in parts-per-million (PPM) for each LKT within each sample was
obtained by dividing the number of bp covering all contigs and
unassembled reads pertaining to that LKT by the total number of non-
host base pairs sequenced for that sample.
Stool nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Fecal extractions were based on published recommendations122.
Samples were thawed on ice and buffer (2H-phosphate buffered sal-
ine + 0.01% sodium azide; pH 7.5) was added at 5 ml/1 g of material.
Samples were sonicated 2× 30 s (50% power) on ice, vortexed for 1 min,
and centrifuged at 8000 rcf for 20 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was added
to a 3 kDa ﬁlter concentrator to further remove particulates and pro-
teins. The ﬂow through was collected after about an hour which
amounted to approximately 600 ul. Trimethylsilypropanesulfonate
was added at 200 uM concentration as a chemical shift standard and
concentration reference. NMR spectra were acquired on an 800 MHz
Agilent DD2 console equipped with a cryogenically cooled probe. A
1-dimensional NOESY sequence with 4 s acquisition time, 1 s recycle
delay, and 100 ms mixing time was used. Chenomx software (Alberta,
Canada) was used for processing and spectral analysis. Metaboanalyst
was used for statistical comparisons.
Clinical follow-up
Each participant was recontacted by a physician on the investigative
team between 11/2021 and 7/2022 to inquire about changes in their
clinical condition.
Statistical analysis
This research protocol utilized an exploratory design coupled with a
broad and deep phenotyping approach. The assembled data repre-
sents a multidimensional description of post-infectious ME/CFS cases
collected with the intent to generate new hypotheses.
Using strict case criteria and adjudication process we minimized
medical misattribution and studied a homogeneous population. Since
the deep phenotyping resulted in a large number of measurements,
our statistical approach used a modiﬁed concept of consilience, the
principle that evidence from independent, unrelated sources can
converge on strong conclusions. Here, measures were purposely
selected to interrogate different facets of immunologic, bioenergetic,
and homeostatic physiology and determine if similar results would
emerge from the different techniques employed. It also used repeti-
tion of measures to aid in the interpretation of data variance and
reliability.
This exploratory approach embraces the explanatory power of
negative ﬁndings. Small sample sizes can be adequate for applying
logic to demonstrate that a phenomenon is not related to a particular
physiological process123. These data can be used to estimate the futility
of continuing to look for a physiological difference that likely does
not exist.
The sample size for the cohort was selected for convenience; no
statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. With the
sample size of this cohort, we anticipated being only able to detect
large effects. Post-hoc calculations of the effect size for a phenotyping
sample of 21 and 17 participants to achieve a power of 80% is 0.94.
Similar calculations for the exercise sample of nine and six partici-
pants is 1.27.
Inherent in the data are numerous estimates of effect size and
correlation, even for variables that do not reach statistical signiﬁcance.
While the precision of these effect sizes may be poor, they are reported
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
22

to provide a sense of the strength of relationship and would be useful
for determining statistical power for future research.
Statistically, each measure in the protocol was analyzed inde-
pendent from all others. The statistical testing approach for each
measure is listed in Supplementary Data S1. Where appropriate, sta-
tistical correction for multiple comparisons was performed within the
measurement analyzed. Given the exploratory nature of the study, no
statistical correction for multiple comparisons was performed across
the different measures or for correlational analyses.
For analysis of biological samples, two or more technical repli-
cates were used. Clinical evaluations were performed without repli-
cation. There was no randomization in this study. There were no
interventions in this study. All researchers performing the experi-
mental analysis of biological samples were blinded to diagnostic
group. Evaluating clinicians were not blinded to diagnostic group.
Details about data exclusions for each analysis performed can be
reviewed in Supplementary Data S23.
Statistical analysis of heart rate variability
A text ﬁle indicating timing in milliseconds between normal beats was
exported. Rstudio 1.1.463(19) was used to remove non-normal beats
and re-order data start-time to 8am. The subsequent text ﬁle was
imported into Kubios HRV Version 1.0 with an artifact correction
threshold of 0.3 s. HRV analysis was performed as recommended by
the 1996 ESC and NASPE HRV task force and European Heart Rhythm
Association. No de-trending was performed. Time-domain metrics
included NN interval, pNN50, RMSSD, SDNN, SDNNi and SDANN
measured over day(12-h), night(12-h), and 24-h periods. Frequency-
domain metrics included VLF(0–0.04 Hz), LF(0.04–0.15 Hz), and
HF(0.15–0.4 Hz) measured over day (12-h), night (12-h), 24-h, and 5-min
periods. Frequency analysis was conducted using a Lomb-Scargle
periodogram with a smoothing window width of 0.02 Hz. Non-linear
metrics included SD1, SD2, SD1/SD2 and were measured in one hour
segments. Representative traces (HR, LF, HF) were plotted using data
sampled at one minute intervals.
Subsequent analyses between study participants and controls
were performed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0.0 for Mac,
(GraphPad Software, San Diego, California USA) and SAS 9.4 (SAS
Institute, Cary, NC). Mann–Whitney tests and Chi-square tests were
used to evaluate the difference between HV and PI-ME/CFS partici-
pants. Scatterplot graphs display a bar signifying the median of the
distribution. Non-linear measures (SD1, SD2 and SD1/SD2) and heart
rate were examined using a mixed-effects model to account for 24-h
repeated measurements with adjustments for hour of day; results of
these latter measures were reported and displayed as least-square
mean (lsmean) +/−standard error (stand err.) for PI-ME/CFS and HVs,
respectively. A p-value < 0.05 is considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Statistical analysis of effort expenditure for rewards task
Following the analytic strategy described by Treadway15, generalized
estimating equations (GEE) were used to model the effects of trial-by-
trial and participant variables on hard task choice. A binarydistribution
and logit link function were used to model the probability of choosing
the hard task versus the easy task. All models included reward prob-
ability, reward magnitude, expected value (the product of reward
probability and reward magnitude), and trial number, in addition to
binary categorical variables indicating participant group and sex.
Emulating Treadway et al., the two-way interactions between PI-ME/
CFS diagnosis and reward probability, PI-ME/CFS diagnosis and reward
magnitude, and PI-ME/CFS diagnosis and expected value were also
tested, as was the three-way interaction among PI-ME/CFS diagnosis,
reward magnitude, and reward probability. One new two-way inter-
action, the interaction of PI-ME/CFS diagnosis and trial number, was
tested as well in order to determine whether rate of fatigue differed by
diagnostic group.
Departing from the procedures described by Treadway15, GEE was
also used to model the effects of trial-by-trial and participant variables
on task completion. A binary distribution and logit link function were
again used given the binary nature of the task completion variable (i.e.,
success or failure). The model included reward probability, reward
magnitude, expected value, trial number, participant diagnosis, and
participant sex, as well as a new term indexing the difﬁculty of the task
chosen (easy or hard). The three-way interaction of participant diag-
nosis, trial number, and task difﬁculty was evaluated in order to
determine whether participants’ abilities to complete the easy and
hard tasks differed between diagnostic group, and in turn whether
fatigue demonstrated differential effects on probability of completion
based on diagnosis and task difﬁculty. Additionally, GEE was used to
model the effects of these independent variables and interactions on
button press rate, to provide an alternative quantiﬁcation of task
performance. This time, the default distribution and link function were
used. The model’s independent variables and interaction terms were
the same as in the above task completion model.
All three sets of GEE models were performed using an exchange-
able working correlation structure. Unstructured models were tested
as well, but failed to converge. All GEE models were implemented
in SAS 9.4.
Statistical analysis of repetitive grip testing
Grip force data was ﬁltered with a lowpass 8 Hz butterworth of order 2
and normalized to the maximum voluntary contraction. To represent
the evolution of fatigue, data collected during the 1st block was com-
pared to the last successful block and the three following failed blocks.
Statistical analysis of functional MRI repetitive grip testing
AFNI124,125 was used to process anatomical and EPI timeseries with the
afni_proc.py tool that included removing the ﬁrst two volumes,
despiking the timeseries, registering the EPI data to the anatomical
scan, adjusting for slice timing offsets, motion correcting these time-
series referring to least outlier volume with rigid body transformations
using cubic polynomial interpolation, and spatially blurring the time-
series with a 6 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel. @ANATICOR was used to
remove white matter signal from the timeseries to reduce scanner-
related artifacts126 and also to remove CSF signal. The motion limit was
set to 3 mm and removed volumes with more than 10% of outliers as
deﬁned with 3dToutcount tool in AFNI. The demeaned and derivatives
of head motion parameters were regressed out. The anatomical and
the EPI timeseries were transformed to the MNI template with non-
linear transformations.
Regression analysis with AFNI’s 3dDeconvolve tool was used, with
a box car model for each 30 s block of grip force. The ﬁrst 16 blocks of
the task were divided into quartiles of four blocks each. Blocks were
pooled together in this fashion to better estimate fatigue-related brain
activation. We used a different approach than in the TMS session to
represent the evolution of fatigue because we needed to pool blocks
together to better estimate fatigue-related brain activation. For group
analysis, linear mixed-effects (3dLME tool in AFNI) were used with two
groups and four blocks and participants as a random factor. A voxel
threshold of p ≤0.01 and a cluster threshold of p ≤0.05, k ≥65 (mul-
tiple comparisons correction) was used. We also used a t-test with the
3dMEMA tool in AFNI to assess commonly activated areas.
Statistical analysis of RNA sequencing data
RNA sequence data was obtained from the libraries using the bcl2fastq
v.2.17; Illumina software. RNA sequences were subjected to quality
control (FastQC, a quality control tool for high throughput sequence
data and available online at: http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.
uk/projects/fastqc), and trimmomatic (https://github.com/timﬂutre/
trimmomatic) to remove adapters, followed by alignment to the
human genome (GRCh38) using STAR127. Gene expression levels were
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
23

quantiﬁed using featuresCounts128. DE analysis was performed on
PBMC and muscle RNAseq data using limma129, and genes with nominal
p-value ≤0.05 were considered DE. BMI was used as a covariate in sex
separated and combined cohorts. Pathway enrichment analysis was
performed using the R package clusterProﬁler130, which uses the ﬁsher
test to determine statistical signiﬁcance. Additionally, prior known
protein-protein interactions for the DE genes were extracted from the
STRING resource (https://string-db.org/)131. Protein-protein interac-
tions with a conﬁdence score of >0.7 were reported. The fold change
information of the genes node in the PPI network are highlighted as
red (for upregulated genes) and blue (for downregulated gene) color
nodes in Cytoscape132.
Statistical analysis of aptamer-based proteomics, metabo-
lomics, and lipidomics data
For these datasets, the data analysis is described below. Partial least
squares
discrimination
analysis
(PLSDA)
(mixOmics;
https://
bioconductor.org/packages/mixOmics/) was used to analyze the data
and calculate the variable importance in prediction (VIP) scores for all
the metabolites measured. Brieﬂy, variables measurements with
missing values in >50% of the samples were removed. For the
remaining variables, the missing values were imputed with half of the
minimum measurements for the respective metabolite. All the vari-
ables with VIP score >1 were subset for either pathway level inference
or were assessed individually for known functions, and their expres-
sion level between groups are shown in the selected heatmaps. The
features with VIP > 1 were considered to be important because the
squared sum of all VIP values is equal to the number feature and thus,
the average VIP would be equal to 1133.
Statistical analysis of transposable element expression data
RNA sequencing data from the PBMCs was aligned to the human
genome (GRCh38) using STAR (PMID: 23104886) to allow for multi-
aligned
sequences
using
the
following
criteria:
winAn-
chorMultimapNmax 100 and outFilterMultimapNmax 100. The trans-
posable elements gene transfer ﬁle (GTF) was generated from the
UCSC genome database. Gene expression quantiﬁcation was per-
formed with the UCSC RepeatMasker GTF ﬁle using the TEtranscripts
tool (PMID: 26206304). The gene expression count matrix was used
and DEseq2 R package was used to perform DE analysis. The summary
DE table is reported. In parallel, the RNAsequencing data from the
PBMCs were aligned to the human genome (GRCh38) using bowtie2,
and HERV elements were quantiﬁed with the author-provided GTF ﬁle
using Telescope tool (PMID: 31568525). No transposable elements
were quantiﬁed from the dataset using this tool.
Statistical analysis of microbiome shotgun metagenomics data
Comparisons between samples were interrogated from Summar-
izedExperiment objects134 constructed using the JAMSbeta pipeline
of
the
JAMS_BW
package.
Ordination
plots
were
made
with
the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) algorithm
using the uwot package in R (https://github.com/jlmelville/uwot)
and the ggplot2 library. Permanova values were obtained using the
adonis function of the vegan package, with 10,000 permutations
and pairwise distances calculated using Bray–Curtis distance. Heat-
maps were drawn using the ComplexHeatmap package135. For each
feature, p-values were calculated using the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon
U-test on PPM relative abundances for that feature in samples within
each group.
Reproducibility of data analyses
In an effort to promote open science and reproducibility, the ﬁnal
source data ﬁles were reanalyzed where appropriate and individual
source data ﬁles and source code used to analyze and visualize
those data have been provided where possible and are available at
https://github.com/docwalitt/National-Institutes-of-Health-Myalgic-
Encephalomyelitis-Chronic-Fatigue-Syndrome-Code-Repository.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The Map ME/CFS databank (accession code: https://www.mapmecfs.
org/group/post-infectious-mecfs-at-the-nih) contains demographics,
performance validity testing, patient reported outcomes, small nerve
ﬁber measures, neuronal injury markers, clinical lab data, heart rate
variability measures, orthostatic challenge data, psychological scales,
body composition measures, extracellular ﬂux measures of PBMCs,
muscle ﬁber measures, actigraphy and strength measures, cardio-
pulmonary exercise test data, whole room calorimetry, neuropsycho-
logical testing, biological measures of blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid, 51
Chromium release assay, metabolomics, proteomics, lipidomics,
mitochondrial sequencing, and stool nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy data. Accessing Map ME/CFS data requires signing up for
an account but otherwise access to the data is unrestricted (Creative
Commons BY 4.0). PBMC gene expression data (GEO Accession viewer
(nih.gov): Accession Code GSE251872), muscle gene expression data
(GEO Accession viewer (nih.gov): Accession Code GSE245661), and
proteomics data (GSE251790 - GEO DataSets - NCBI (nih.gov): Acces-
sion Code: GSE251790; (GSE254030 - GEO DataSets - NCBI (nih.gov):
Accession Code GSE254030) is available at Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) and stool shotgun metagenomic data (SRA Links for BioProject
(Select 954397) - SRA - NCBI (nih.gov), Accession Code SRP467038) are
available at Sequence Read Archive, which are all available at BioPro-
ject (Homo sapiens (ID 954397) - BioProject - NCBI (nih.gov): Accession
Code PRJNA954397). All neurophysiology data from transcranial
magnetic stimulation and functional magnetic resonance imaging
experiments are available at Pennsieve (Deep phenotyping of Post-
infectious Myalgic Encephalomyelitis-Chronic Fatigue Syndrome -
Blackfynn Discover (pennsieve.io); DOI: 10.26275/ile7-wrsk). External
datasets analyzed include GEO GSE13033 (GEO Accession viewer (nih.
gov)) and GEO GSE156792 (GEO Accession viewer (nih.gov)). Source
data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
Codes for the bioinformatic analysis of shotgun metagenomics are
available at: https://github.com/johnmcculloch/JAMS_BW. The JAMS
compatible Kraken2 taxonomic classiﬁcation database used for shot-
gun metagenomics is available at: https://hpc.nih.gov/~mccullochja/
JAMSdb202201.tar.gz. RNA sequence quality control was performed
with
FastQC:
http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/
fastqc, trimmomatic: https://github.com/timﬂutre/trimmomatic, and
multiqc: https://multiqc.info/. Codes for differential gene expression
analysis
are
available
at:
COVID-19_Transcriptomics/Differ-
ential_gene_expression.R
at
master·NHLBI-BCB/COVID-19_Tran-
scriptomics·GitHub. Codes for Pathway enrichment analysis are
available at: COVID-19_Transcriptomics/PathwayEnrichment_cluster-
Proﬁler.R
at
master·NHLBI-BCB/COVID-19_Transcriptomics·GitHub.
Transposable Seqeunce analysis performed with STAR: https://github.
com/alexdobin/STAR,
samtools:
https://github.com/samtools/
samtools,
and
TEcount
tool:
(https://github.com/mhammell-
laboratory/TEtranscripts. Additionally, all the above codes and addi-
tional R scripts used in this study are available at: https://github.com/
docwalitt/National-Institutes-of-Health-Myalgic-Encephalomyelitis-
Chronic-Fatigue-Syndrome-Code-Repository.
References
1.
Hornig, M. et al. Distinct plasma immune signatures in ME/CFS are
present early in the course of illness. Sci. Adv. 1, e1400121 (2015).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
24

2.
Paul, B. D., Lemle, M. D., Komaroff, A. L. & Snyder, S. H. Redox
imbalance links COVID-19 and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118,
e2024358118 (2021).
3.
Nagy-Szakal, D. et al. Fecal metagenomic proﬁles in subgroups of
patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syn-
drome. Microbiome 5, 44 (2017).
4.
Tomas, C. et al. Cellular bioenergetics is impaired in patients with
chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS One 12, e0186802 (2017).
5.
Sweetman, E. et al. A SWATH-MS analysis of Myalgic Encephalo-
myelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cell proteomes reveals mitochondrial dysfunction. J.
Transl. Med. 18, 365 (2020).
6.
Nelson, M. J., Bahl, J. S., Buckley, J. D., Thomson, R. L. & Davison, K.
Evidence of altered cardiac autonomic regulation in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Medicine 98, e17600 (2019).
7.
Brurberg, K. G., Fonhus, M. S., Larun, L., Flottorp, S. & Malterud, K.
Case deﬁnitions for chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encepha-
lomyelitis (CFS/ME): a systematic review. BMJ Open 4,
e003973 (2014).
8.
Nacul, L., Lacerda, E. M., Kingdon, C. C., Curran, H. & Bowman, E.
W. How have selection bias and disease misclassiﬁcation under-
mined the validity of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome studies? J. Health Psychol. 24, 1765–1769 (2019).
9.
Hickie, I. et al. Post-infective and chronic fatigue syndromes pre-
cipitated by viral and non-viral pathogens: prospective cohort
study. BMJ 333, 575 (2006).
10.
Hotopf, M., Noah, N. & Wessely, S. Chronic fatigue and minor
psychiatric morbidity after viral meningitis: a controlled study. J.
Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 60, 504–509 (1996).
11.
Fark, A. R. Infectious mononucleosis, Epstein-Barr virus, and
chronic fatigue syndrome: a prospective case series. J. Fam. Pract.
32, 202, 205–206, 209 (1991).
12.
Nath, A. Long-Haul COVID. Neurology 95, 559–560 (2020).
13.
Greher, M. R. & Wodushek, T. R. Performance Validity Testing in
Neuropsychology: Scientiﬁc Basis and Clinical Application-A Brief
Review. J. Psychiatr. Pr. 23, 134–140 (2017).
14.
Ciciliot, S., Rossi, A. C., Dyar, K. A., Blaauw, B. & Schiafﬁno, S.
Muscle type and ﬁber type speciﬁcity in muscle wasting. Int J.
Biochem Cell Biol. 45, 2191–2199 (2013).
15.
Treadway, M. T., Buckholtz, J. W., Schwartzman, A. N., Lambert, W.
E. & Zald, D. H. Worth the ‘EEfRT’? The effort expenditure for
rewards task as an objective measure of motivation and anhedo-
nia. PLoS One 4, e6598 (2009).
16.
Goudsmit, E. M., Nijs, J., Jason, L. A. & Wallman, K. E. Pacing as a
strategy to improve energy management in myalgic encephalo-
myelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a consensus document. Dis-
abil. Rehabil. 34, 1140–1147 (2012).
17.
Dimitrova, N. A., Hogrel, J. Y., Arabadzhiev, T. I. & Dimitrov, G. V.
Estimate of M-wave changes in human biceps brachii during
continuous stimulation. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol 15,
341–348 (2005).
18.
Arabadzhiev, T. I., Dimitrov, G. V. & Dimitrova, N. A. Simulation
analysis of the ability to estimate motor unit propagation velocity
non-invasively by different two-channel methods and types of
multi-electrodes. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol 13, 403–415 (2003).
19.
Samii, A., Wassermann, E. M. & Hallett, M. Post-exercise depres-
sion of motor evoked potentials as a function of exercise duration.
Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 105, 352–356 (1997).
20.
Samii, A. et al. Decreased postexercise facilitation of motor
evoked potentials in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome or
depression. Neurology 47, 1410–1414 (1996).
21.
Hansen, J. E., Sue, D. Y. & Wasserman, K. Predicted values for
clinical exercise testing. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 129, S49–S55 (1984).
22.
Wasserman K, S. W., et al. Principals of Exercise Testing and
Interpretation. 5th edn, (Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2011).
23.
Keyser, R. E. et al. Evidence for aerobic insufﬁciency in women
with systemic Lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 49,
16–22 (2003).
24.
Lundsgaard, A. M., Fritzen, A. M. & Kiens, B. Molecular Regulation
of Fatty Acid Oxidation in Skeletal Muscle during Aerobic Exercise.
Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 29, 18–30 (2018).
25.
Jeppesen, J. & Kiens, B. Regulation and limitations to fatty acid
oxidation during exercise. J. Physiol. 590, 1059–1068 (2012).
26.
Alldritt, I., Greenhaff, P. L. & Wilkinson, D. J. Metabolomics as an
Important Tool for Determining the Mechanisms of Human Ske-
letal Muscle Deconditioning. Int J. Mol. Sci. 22, 13575 (2021).
27.
Melanson, E. L., MacLean, P. S. & Hill, J. O. Exercise improves fat
metabolism in muscle but does not increase 24-h fat oxidation.
Exerc Sport Sci. Rev. 37, 93–101 (2009).
28.
Nkiliza, A. et al. Sex-speciﬁc plasma lipid proﬁles of ME/CFS
patients and their association with pain, fatigue, and cognitive
symptoms. J. Transl. Med. 19, 370 (2021).
29.
Sweet, J. J. et al. American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology
(AACN) 2021 consensus statement on validity assessment: Update
of the 2009 AACN consensus conference statement on neu-
ropsychological assessment of effort, response bias, and mal-
ingering. Clin. Neuropsychol. 35, 1053–1106 (2021).
30.
Mandarano, A. H. et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome patients exhibit altered T cell metabolism and cytokine
associations. J. Clin. Invest 130, 1491–1505 (2020).
31.
Doricchi, F., Lasaponara, S., Pazzaglia, M. & Silvetti, M. Left and
right temporal-parietal junctions (TPJs) as “match/mismatch”
hedonic machines: A unifying account of TPJ function. Phys. Life
Rev. 42, 56–92 (2022).
32.
Nahab, F. B. et al. The neural processes underlying self-agency.
Cereb. Cortex 21, 48–55 (2011).
33.
Sacco, P., Hope, P. A., Thickbroom, G. W., Byrnes, M. L. & Mas-
taglia, F. L. Corticomotor excitability and perception of effort
during sustained exercise in the chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 110, 1883–1891 (1999).
34.
Stussman, B. et al. Characterization of Post-exertional Malaise in
Patients With Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syn-
drome. Front Neurol. 11, 1025 (2020).
35.
van der Schaaf, M. E. et al. Fatigue Is Associated With Altered
Monitoring and Preparation of Physical Effort in Patients With
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neu-
roimaging 3, 392–404 (2018).
36.
Stevens, S., Snell, C., Stevens, J., Keller, B. & VanNess, J. M. Car-
diopulmonary Exercise Test Methodology for Assessing Exertion
Intolerance in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syn-
drome. Front Pediatr. 6, 242 (2018).
37.
Bazelmans, E., Bleijenberg, G., Van Der Meer, J. W. & Folgering, H.
Is physical deconditioning a perpetuating factor in chronic fatigue
syndrome? A controlled study on maximal exercise performance
and relations with fatigue, impairment and physical activity. Psy-
chol. Med 31, 107–114 (2001).
38.
Davenport, T. E., Stevens, S. R., Stevens, J., Snell, C. R. & Van Ness,
J. M. Properties of measurements obtained during cardio-
pulmonary exercise testing in individuals with Myalgic Encepha-
lomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Work 66, 247–256 (2020).
39.
Aoun Sebaiti, M. et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of
cognitive impairment in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fati-
gue syndrome (ME/CFS). Sci. Rep. 12, 2157 (2022).
40.
Kaduk, K. & Hadj-Bouziane, F. Insights into the role of noradrena-
line in effortful decisions. PLoS Biol. 20, e3001545 (2022).
41.
Thomas, T. et al. COVID-19 infection alters kynurenine and fatty
acid metabolism, correlating with IL-6 levels and renal status. JCI
Insight 5, e140327 (2020).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
25

42.
Bizjak, D. A. et al. Kynurenine serves as useful biomarker in acute,
Long- and Post-COVID-19 diagnostics. Front Immunol. 13,
1004545 (2022).
43.
Boneva, R. S. et al. Higher heart rate and reduced heart rate
variability persist during sleep in chronic fatigue syndrome: a
population-based study. Auton. Neurosci. 137, 94–101 (2007).
44.
Sheedy, J. R. et al. Increased d-lactic Acid intestinal bacteria in
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Vivo 23, 621–628 (2009).
45.
Barker, E., Fujimura, S. F., Fadem, M. B., Landay, A. L. & Levy, J. A.
Immunologic abnormalities associated with chronic fatigue syn-
drome. Clin. Infect. Dis. 18, S136–S141 (1994).
46.
Sotzny, F. et al. Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syn-
drome—Evidence for an autoimmune disease. Autoimmun. Rev.
17, 601–609 (2018).
47.
Caligiuri, M. et al. Phenotypic and functional deﬁciency of natural
killer cells in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Immunol.
139, 3306–3313 (1987).
48.
Aoki, T., Miyakoshi, H., Usuda, Y. & Herberman, R. B. Low NK syn-
drome and its relationship to chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin.
Immunol. Immunopathol. 69, 253–265 (1993).
49.
Sung, A. P. et al. Antibody-Dependent Cell-mediated Cytotoxicity
(ADCC) in Familial Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS). Fatigue 8, 226–244 (2020).
50.
Brenu, E. W. et al. Longitudinal investigation of natural killer cells
and cytokines in chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalo-
myelitis. J. Transl. Med. 10, 88 (2012).
51.
Eaton-Fitch, N., du Preez, S., Cabanas, H., Staines, D. & Marshall-
Gradisnik, S. A systematic review of natural killer cells proﬁle and
cytotoxic function in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome. Syst. Rev. 8, 279 (2019).
52.
Madge, L. A., Kluger, M. S., Orange, J. S. & May, M. J. Lymphotoxin-
alpha 1 beta 2 and LIGHT induce classical and noncanonical NF-
kappa B-dependent proinﬂammatory gene expression in vascular
endothelial cells. J. Immunol. 180, 3467–3477 (2008).
53.
Lin, L., Wu, C. & Hu, K. Tissue plasminogen activator activates NF-
kappaB through a pathway involving annexin A2/CD11b and
integrin-linked kinase. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 23, 1329–1338 (2012).
54.
Raijmakers, R. P. H. et al. A possible role for mitochondrial-derived
peptides humanin and MOTS-c in patients with Q fever fatigue
syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Transl. Med. 17,
157 (2019).
55.
James, L. M. & Georgopoulos, A. P. At the Root of 3 “Long” Dis-
eases: Persistent Antigens Inﬂicting Chronic Damage on the Brain
and Other Organs in Gulf War Illness, Long-COVID-19, and
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Neurosci. Insights 17,
26331055221114817 (2022).
56.
Giloteaux, L. et al. Reduced diversity and altered composition of
the gut microbiome in individuals with myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Microbiome 4, 30 (2016).
57.
Simonato, M. et al. Tryptophan Metabolites, Cytokines, and Fatty
Acid Binding Protein 2 in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome. Biomedicines 9, 1724 (2021).
58.
Dehhaghi, M. et al. The Role of Kynurenine Pathway and NAD(+)
Metabolism in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syn-
drome. Aging Dis. 13, 698–711 (2022).
59.
Guntur, V. P. et al. Signatures of Mitochondrial Dysfunction and
Impaired Fatty Acid Metabolism in Plasma of Patients with Post-
Acute Sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC). Metabolites 12, 1026 (2022).
60.
Ioannidis, J. P. Why most discovered true associations are inﬂated.
Epidemiology 19, 640–648 (2008).
61.
Xu, Q. et al. Adaptive immune responses to SARS-CoV-2 persist in
the pharyngeal lymphoid tissue of children. Nat. Immunol. 24,
186–199 (2023).
62.
Gaebler, C. et al. Evolution of antibody immunity to SARS-CoV-2.
Nature 591, 639–644 (2021).
63.
Zollner, A. et al. Postacute COVID-19 is Characterized by Gut Viral
Antigen Persistence in Inﬂammatory Bowel Diseases. Gastro-
enterology 163, 495–506.e498 (2022).
64.
Fukuda, K. et al. The chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive
approach to its deﬁnition and study. International Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome Study Group. Ann. Intern. Med. 121, 953–959 (1994).
65.
Carruthers, B. M. et al. Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome. J. Chronic Fatigue Syndr. 11, 7–115 (2003).
66.
Clayton, E. W. Beyond myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome: an IOM report on redeﬁning an illness. JAMA 313,
1101–1102 (2015).
67.
Ben-Porath, Y. S., & Tellegen, A. MMPI-2-RF (Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory-2 Restructured Form): Manual for adminis-
tration, scoring, and interpretation (University of Minnesota
Press, 2008).
68.
Boone, K. B. et al. Validation of a new technique to detect mal-
ingering of cognitive symptoms: the b Test. Arch. Clin. Neu-
ropsychol. 15, 227–241 (2000).
69.
Boone, K. B. et al. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the Rey Dot
Counting Test in patients with suspect effort and various clinical
samples. Arch. Clin. Neuropsychologist 17, 625–642 (2002).
70.
Green, P. Word memory test for windows. User’s manual and pro-
gram (Revised 2005) (Green Publishing, 2005).
71.
Ware, J. E. Jr. et al. Comparison of methods for the scoring and
statistical analysis of SF-36 health proﬁle and summary measures:
summary of results from the Medical Outcomes Study. Med. Care
33, AS264–AS279 (1995).
72.
Wagner, D. et al. Psychometric properties of the CDC Symptom
Inventory for assessment of chronic fatigue syndrome. Popul.
Health Metr. 3, 8 (2005).
73.
Smets, E. M., Garssen, B., Bonke, B. & De Haes, J. C. The Multi-
dimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI) psychometric qualities of an
instrument to assess fatigue. J. Psychosom. Res. 39,
315–325 (1995).
74.
Hays, R. D., Bjorner, J. B., Revicki, D. A., Spritzer, K. L. & Cella, D.
Development of physical and mental health summary scores from
the patient-reported outcomes measurement information system
(PROMIS) global items. Qual. Life Res. 18, 873–880 (2009).
75.
Melzack, R. The McGill Pain Questionnaire: major properties and
scoring methods. Pain 1, 277–299 (1975).
76.
Galer, B. S. & Jensen, M. P. Development and preliminary valida-
tion of a pain measure speciﬁc to neuropathic pain: the Neuro-
pathic Pain Scale. Neurology 48, 332–338 (1997).
77.
Wolfe, F. et al. Fibromyalgia criteria and severity scales for clinical
and epidemiological studies: a modiﬁcation of the ACR Pre-
liminary Diagnostic Criteria for Fibromyalgia. J. Rheumatol. 38,
1113–1122 (2011).
78.
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L. & Williams, J. B. The PHQ-15: validity of a
new measure for evaluating the severity of somatic symptoms.
Psychosom. Med. 64, 258–266 (2002).
79.
Buysse, D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R. & Kupfer,
D. J. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Indez: A New Instrument for
Psychiatric Practice and Research. Psychiatry Res. 28,
193–213 (1988).
80.
Jacobsen, P. B. et al. Fatigue in women receiving adjuvant che-
motherapy for breast cancer: characteristics, course, and corre-
lates. J. Pain. Symptom Manag. 18, 233–242 (1999).
81.
Seidenberg, M., Haltiner, A., Taylor, M. A., Hermann, B. B. & Wyler,
A. Development and validation of a Multiple Ability Self-Report
Questionnaire. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 16, 93–104 (1994).
82.
Rimes, K. A. & Chalder, T. The Beliefs about Emotions Scale:
validity, reliability and sensitivity tochange. J. Psychosom. Res. 68,
285–292 (2010).
83.
Lauria, G. et al. European Federation of Neurological Societies/
Peripheral Nerve Society Guideline on the use of skin biopsy in the
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
26

diagnosis of small ﬁber neuropathy. Report of a joint task force of
the European Federation of Neurological Societies and the Per-
ipheral Nerve Society. Eur. J. Neurol. 17, 903–912 (2010).
84.
Rissin, D. M. et al. Simultaneous detection of single molecules and
singulated ensembles of molecules enables immunoassays with
broad dynamic range. Anal. Chem. 83, 2279–2285 (2011).
85.
Goldstein, D. S., Holmes, C. & Sharabi, Y. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid
biomarkers of central catecholamine deﬁciency in Parkinson’s
disease and other synucleinopathies. Brain 135, 1900–1913 (2012).
86.
Goldstein, D. S. et al. Differential abnormalities of cerebrospinal
ﬂuid dopaminergic versus noradrenergic indices in synucleino-
pathies. J. Neurochem 158, 554–568 (2021).
87.
Bernstein, D. P. et al. Development and validation of a brief
screening version of the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. Child
Abus. Negl. 27, 169–190 (2003).
88.
Foa, E. B., Cashman, L., Jaycox, L. & Perry, K. The Validation of a
Self-Report Measure of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Post-
traumatic Diagnostic Scale. Psychological Assess. 9,
445–451 (1997).
89.
Bernstein, D. F., L. Childhood Trauma Questionnaire: A retro-
spective self-report manual (The Psychological Corpora-
tion, 1998).
90.
Kooiman, C. G., Ouwehand, A. W. & ter Kuile, M. M. The Sexual and
Physical Abuse Questionnaire (SPAQ). A screening instrument for
adults to assess past and current experiences of abuse. Child
Abus. Negl. 26, 939–953 (2002).
91.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Ball, R. & Ranieri, W. Comparison of Beck
Depression Inventories -IA and -II in psychiatric outpatients. J.
Personal. Assess. 67, 588–597 (1996).
92.
Beck, A. T., Epstein, N., Brown, G. & Steer, R. A. An inventory for
measuring clinical anxiety: psychometric properties. J. Consult.
Clin. Psychol. 56, 893–897 (1988).
93.
Feng,L. R., Nguyen, Q., Ross, A. & Saligan, L. N. Evaluating the Role
of Mitochondrial Function in Cancer-related Fatigue. J. Vis. Exp. 17,
:57736 (2018).
94.
Wang, K., Li, M. & Hakonarson, H. ANNOVAR: functional annota-
tion of genetic variants from high-throughput sequencing data.
Nucleic Acids Res. 38, e164 (2010).
95.
Troiano, R. P. et al. Physical activity in the United States measured
by accelerometer. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 40, 181–188 (2008).
96.
Liguori, G. American College of Sports Medicine’s Guidelines for
Exercise Testing and Prescription. 11 edn, (Wolters Kluwer, 2021).
97.
The Psychological Corporation, T. P. Wechsler Test of Adult
Reading Manual. (San Antonio TX, 2001).
98.
Brandt, J. & Benedict, R. H. B. Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-
Revised (PAR, 2001).
99.
Klǿve, H. In The medical clinics of North America, Vol. 47
(ed Forster, F. M.) 1647–1658 (Saunders, 1963).
100. Wechsler, D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (The Psycholo-
gical Corporation, 1997).
101.
Benedict, R. H. B. Brief Visuospatial Memory Test-Revised: Profes-
sional Manual (Psychological Assessment Resource, 1997).
102.
Kongs, S. K., Thompson, L. L., Iverson, G. L. & Heaton, R. K. Wis-
consin Card Sorting Test −64 Card Computerized Version (Psy-
chological Assessment Resources, 2000).
103.
Benton, A. L. & Hamsher, K. D. Multilingual Aphasia Examination
(AJA Associates, 1989).
104.
Gronwall, D. M. A. Paced auditory serial-addition task: A measure
of recovery from concussion. Percept. Mot. Skills 44,
367–373 (1977).
105.
Greenberg, L., Kindschi, C., Dupuy, T. & Corman, C. Test of Vari-
ables of Attention: Clinical guide (Universal Attention Dis-
orders, 1996).
106.
Gold, L. et al. Aptamer-based multiplexed proteomic technology
for biomarker discovery. PLoS One 5, e15004 (2010).
107.
Rohloff, J. C. et al. Nucleic Acid Ligands With Protein-like
Side Chains: Modiﬁed Aptamers and Their Use as Diagnostic
and Therapeutic Agents. Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 3, e201
(2014).
108.
Candia, J. et al. Assessment of Variability in the SOMAscan Assay.
Sci. Rep. 7, 14248 (2017).
109.
Cheung, F. Web Tool for Navigating and Plotting SomaLogic ADAT
Files. https://github.com/foocheung/ME-CFS_study_2020 (2020).
110.
Enose-Akahata, Y. et al. Immunophenotypic characterization of
CSF B cells in virus-associated neuroinﬂammatory diseases. PLoS
Pathog. 14, e1007042 (2018).
111.
Elsner, L. & Dressel, R. (51)Cr-release to monitor NK cell cytotoxi-
city. Methods Enzymol. 631, 497–512 (2020).
112.
Pinal-Fernandez, I. et al. Machine learning algorithms reveal
unique gene expression proﬁles in muscle biopsies from patients
with different types of myositis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 79,
1234–1242 (2020).
113.
Ghorasaini, M. et al. Cross-Laboratory Standardization of Pre-
clinical Lipidomics Using Differential Mobility Spectrometry and
Multiple Reaction Monitoring. Anal. Chem. 93,
16369–16378 (2021).
114.
Semba, R. D. et al. Serum lipids in adults with late age-related
macular degeneration: a case-control study. Lipids Health Dis. 18,
7 (2019).
115.
McGarry, A. et al. Cross-sectional analysis of plasma and CSF
metabolomic markers in Huntington’s disease for participants of
varying functional disability: a pilot study. Sci. Rep. 10,
20490 (2020).
116.
McCulloch, J. A. et al. JAMS—A framework for the taxonomic and
functional exploration of microbiological genomic data. bioRxiv,
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.03.03.
531026v1 (2023).
117.
Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a ﬂexible
trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30,
2114–2120 (2014).
118.
Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with
Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359 (2012).
119.
Li, D. et al. MEGAHIT v1.0: A fast and scalable metagenome
assembler driven by advanced methodologies and community
practices. Methods 102, 3–11 (2016).
120.
Wood, D. E., Lu, J. & Langmead, B. Improved metagenomic ana-
lysis with Kraken 2. Genome Biol. 20, 257 (2019).
121.
Seemann, T. Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioin-
formatics 30, 2068–2069 (2014).
122.
Karu, N. et al. A review on human fecal metabolomics: Methods,
applications and the human fecal metabolome database. Anal.
Chim. Acta 1030, 1–24 (2018).
123.
Yoshihara, M. & Yoshihara, M. ‘Necessary and sufﬁcient’ in
biology is not necessarily necessary—confusions and erro-
neous conclusions resulting from misapplied logic in the ﬁeld
of biology, especially neuroscience. J. Neurogenet. 32,
53–64 (2018).
124.
Cox, R. W. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of func-
tional magnetic resonance neuroimages. Comput. Biomed. Res.
29, 162–173 (1996).
125.
Cox, R. W. & Hyde, J. S. Software tools for analysis and visualiza-
tion of fMRI data. NMR Biomed. 10, 171–178 (1997).
126.
Jo, H. J., Saad, Z. S., Simmons, W. K., Milbury, L. A. & Cox, R. W.
Mapping sources of correlation in resting state FMRI, with artifact
detection and removal. Neuroimage 52, 571–582 (2010).
127.
Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioin-
formatics 29, 15–21 (2013).
128.
Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efﬁcient general
purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic fea-
tures. Bioinformatics 30, 923–930 (2014).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
27

129.
Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses
for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res.
43, e47 (2015).
130.
Yu, G., Wang, L. G., Han, Y. & He, Q. Y. clusterProﬁler: an R package
for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 16,
284–287 (2012).
131.
Szklarczyk, D. et al. STRING v11: protein-protein association net-
works with increased coverage, supporting functional discovery
in genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids Res. 47,
D607–D613 (2019).
132.
Shannon, P. et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for inte-
grated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome
Res. 13, 2498–2504 (2003).
133.
Cho, H. W. et al. Discovery of metabolite features for the model-
ling and analysis of high-resolution NMR spectra. Int J. Data Min.
Bioinform 2, 176–192 (2008).
134.
V. O. Martin Morgan, Jim Hester and Hervé Pagès: Summar-
izedExperiment container https://bioconductor.org/packages/
SummarizedExperiment (2021).
135.
Gu, Z., Eils, R. & Schlesner, M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns
and correlations in multidimensional genomic data. Bioinfor-
matics 32, 2847–2849 (2016).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported (in part) by the Intramural Research Pro-
gram of the NIH, including National Institute of Neurological Diseases
and Stroke (NINDS), National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI),
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Disease (NIAID), National Institute of Diabetes, Digestion,
and Kidney Disease (NIDDK), National Cancer Institute (NCI), National
Institute of Aging (NIA), National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoske-
letal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA),
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR), National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institute of
Nursing Research (NINR), National Center for Complementary and
Integrative Health (NCCIH), and NIH Clinical Center (CC). Grant support
for this project included: ZIA NS003157 (A.N.), ZIA MH002922-14 (J.S.),
ZIA HL 006210 (M.L.), ZIA HL 006212 (M.L.), ZIA DK071014 (K.C.), ZIA
DK071014 (K.C.), ZIA HL005199 (M.S.), ZIA ES103362 (G.A.M.), and the
NIH Common Fund (A.N.). We want to thank Francis Collins and Walter
Koroshetz for their support of this project. Additionally, we would like to
acknowledge the following people for their advice and support for this
project: Anthony Komaroff, Lucinda Bateman, Benjamin Natelson, Andy
Kogolnik, Daniel Peterson, Michael Tierney, Camilo Toro, Jeffery Lewis,
Ana Acevedo, Jeffery Cohen, Nicolas Grayson, Fred Gill, Wendy Hen-
derson, Nicolaas Fourie, Rosario Jaime-Iara, Paule Joseph, Eugene Major,
Adriana Marques, Bonnie Hodsdon, Susan Robertson, Leora Comis,
Dardo Tomasi, Neil Young, John Tsang, Rose Hayden, Olga Carlson, John
Butman, Dima Hammoud, Govind Bhagvatheeshwaran, Eleanor Goul-
den, Renkui Bai, Michael Polydefkis, Jessica Gill, Chen Lai, Tracey
Rouault, Manik Ghosh, and Angela Walitt.
Author contributions
B.W., M.H., S.J., K.C., Y.E.A, R.A., R.J.B., A.W.B., P.D.B., L.M.K.C., A.B.C.,
B.D., L.F., D.S.G., S.G.H., M.L., J.J.L., A.L.M., J.A.M., J.D.M., L.B.R., M.N.S.,
L.N.S., B.S, J.S., B.J.S., G.T, S.A.T., S.B.Y., CHI Consortium, and A.N.
conceived and designed the study. B.W., S.R.L., P.B., R.J.B., B.Cal., S.C.,
J.C., L.M.K.C., B.W.C., A.B.C., M.S.D., B.D., A.G., D.S.G., S.C.H., S.G.H.,
A.J.G., K.M.K., J.D.K., N.Mad., P.M.M., A.M., T.P., L.B.R., B.S., J.S., S.Si.,
S.So., B.J.S., S.A.T., C.S.V., F.V., C.V., A.W., S.B.Y, and A.N. recruited
participants and collected clinical data, research data, and samples.
B.W., S.R.L, Y.E.A., P.B., R.J.B., A.W.B., P.D.B., B.Cal., B.Cat., L.C., S.C.,
L.M.K.C., B.W.C., A.B.C., B.D., L.R.F., S.A.G., A.G., D.S.G., S.H., S.C.H.,
S.G.H., K.M.K., M.L., N.Mad., N.Mal., P.M.M., R.M., S.M.B., G.N., K.P., I.P-F.,
T.P., B.A.S., S.Si., J.S., B.J.S., S.A.T., C.S.V., F.V., C.V., A.W., S.B.Y, and CHI
Consortium arranged and prepared samples and/or data for analysis.
B.W., K.S., S.R.L., M.H., S.J., K.C., Y.E.A., J.J.B., P.B., R.J.B., A.W.B., P.D.B.
B.Cal., B.Cat., L.C., F.C., L.M.K.C., A.B.C., B.D., L.R.F., D.S.G., S.C.H.,
S.G.H., K.R.J., K.M.K., M.L., N.Mad., N.Mal., A.L.M., J.A.M., P.M.M., R.M.,
G.A.M., S.M.B., G.N., I.P.-F., M.N.S., F.S., S.Si., J.S., B.J.S., G.T., S.A.T.,
C.S.V., C.V, S.B.Y, CHI Consortium, and A.N. performed statistical ana-
lyses. B.W., K.S., S.R.L., M.H., S.J., K.C., R.A., P.B., R.J.B., F.C., L.M.K.C.,
B.D., L.F., D.S.G., S.G.H., M.L., N.Mad., A.L.M., J.A.M., G.A.M., M.N.S., J.S.,
B.J.S., C.V., CHI Consortium, and A.N. drafted the manuscript. All
authors contributed to the revision and editing of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Avindra Nath.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Anthony
Komaroff, Vincent Lombardi and the other, anonymous, reviewers for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is
available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply 2024
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
28

Brian Walitt1, Komudi Singh
2, Samuel R. LaMunion
3, Mark Hallett
1, Steve Jacobson1, Kong Chen
3, Yoshimi Enose-
Akahata
1, Richard Apps4, Jennifer J. Barb
5, Patrick Bedard
1, Robert J. Brychta
3, Ashura Williams Buckley6,
Peter D. Burbelo
7, Brice Calco1, Brianna Cathay8, Li Chen9, Snigdha Chigurupati10, Jinguo Chen4, Foo Cheung4,
Lisa M. K. Chin5, Benjamin W. Coleman11, Amber B. Courville
3, Madeleine S. Deming5, Bart Drinkard5,
Li Rebekah Feng
12, Luigi Ferrucci
13, Scott A. Gabel14, Angelique Gavin1, David S. Goldstein
1, Shahin Hassanzadeh2,
Sean C. Horan
15, Silvina G. Horovitz1, Kory R. Johnson
1, Anita Jones Govan1, Kristine M. Knutson
1, Joy D. Kreskow16,
Mark Levin
2, Jonathan J. Lyons
17, Nicholas Madian
18, Nasir Malik1, Andrew L. Mammen
19, John A. McCulloch
20,
Patrick M. McGurrin
1, Joshua D. Milner
21, Ruin Moaddel13, Geoffrey A. Mueller
14, Amrita Mukherjee4, Sandra Muñoz-
Braceras19, Gina Norato1, Katherine Pak19, Iago Pinal-Fernandez
19, Traian Popa
1, Lauren B. Reoma1, Michael N. Sack2,
Farinaz Safavi1,17, Leorey N. Saligan
16, Brian A. Sellers4, Stephen Sinclair6, Bryan Smith1, Joseph Snow6, Stacey Solin5,
Barbara J. Stussman1,18, Giorgio Trinchieri20, Sara A. Turner5, C. Stephenie Vetter
22, Felipe Vial23, Carlotta Vizioli
1,
Ashley Williams24, Shanna B. Yang5, Center for Human Immunology, Autoimmunity, and Inﬂammation (CHI) Consortium*,
Avindra Nath
1
1National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke (NINDS), Bethesda, MD, USA. 2National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), Bethesda, MD, USA.
3National Institute of Diabetes, Digestion, and Kidney Disease (NIDDK), Bethesda, MD, USA. 4NIH Center for Human Immunology, Autoimmunity, and
Inﬂammation (CHI), Bethesda, MD, USA. 5NIH Clinical Center (CC), Bethesda, MD, USA. 6National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
7National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR), Bethesda, MD, USA. 8Texas A&M School of Engineering Medicine, College Station, TX, USA.
9Afﬁliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College, Sichuan, China. 10George Washington University Hospital, District of Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.
11Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 12National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), Bethesda, MD, USA. 13National Institute of Aging (NIA), Baltimore,
MD, USA. 14National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 15Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
16National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), Bethesda, MD, USA. 17National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID), Bethesda, MD, USA.
18National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), Bethesda, MD, USA. 19National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases (NIAMS), Bethesda, MD, USA. 20National Cancer Institute (NCI), Bethesda, MD, USA. 21Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
22University of Colorado School of Medicine, Boulder, CO, USA. 23Clínica Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile. 24Oakland University William
Beaumont School of Medicine, Rochester, NY, USA. *A list of authors and their afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.
e-mail: Avindra.nath@nih.gov
Center for Human Immunology, Autoimmunity, and Inﬂammation (CHI) Consortium
Richard Apps4, Jinguo Chen4, Foo Cheung4, Amrita Mukherjee4 & Brian A. Sellers4
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45107-3
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:907 
29
