Multimodal approach to identify neuropsychophysiological subgroups in 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and their relevance 
for rehabilitation: protocol for a mechanistic cross-sectional and 
longitudinal study
Ynse Dooms a,b,c
, Lixin Qiu a,c, Iris Coppieters a,c,d,e, Elfi Vergaelen f,g,  
Stephan Claes f,g, Patrick Dupont c,h, Melina Hehl b,c,o, Koen Cuypers b,c,i, Harald Engler j,  
Kirsten Dombrowski j, Kristin Verbeke k, Omer Van den Bergh l, Jeroen Raes m,  
Lukas Van Oudenhove a,c,n,1, Maaike Van Den Houte a,b,c,*,1
, Katleen Bogaerts b,l,1
a Laboratory for Brain-Gut Axis Studies (LaBGAS), Translational Research in Gastrointestinal Disorders (TARGID), Department of Chronic Diseases and Metabolism 
(CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
b REVAL – Rehabilitation Research Center, Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium
c Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
d Pain in Motion Research Group (PAIN), Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Physical Education and Physiotherapy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
e Experimental Health Psychology Research Group, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 6211 LK, the Netherlands
f University Psychiatric Center KU Leuven, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
g Mind Body Research, Psychiatry Research Group, Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
h Laboratory for Cognitive Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
i Movement Control & Neuroplasticity Research Group, Department of Movement Sciences, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium
j Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Immunobiology, Center for Translational Neuro- and Behavioral Sciences (C-TNBS), University Hospital Essen, 
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany
k Laboratory of Digestion and Absorption (DigALab), Translational Research Center in Gastrointestinal Disorders (TARGID), Department of Chronic Diseases and 
Metabolism (CHROMETA), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
l Health Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
m Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
n Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience Lab (CANLab), Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA
o Translational MRI, Department of Imaging & Pathology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Fatigue
Inflammation
Neurophysiology
Gastrointestinal microbiome
Psychological stress
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME)/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) is a debilitating condition 
characterized by severe fatigue and post-exertional malaise (PEM). Reported neuropsychophysiological abnor­
malities suggest ME/CFS is multifactorial, but current knowledge remains fragmented. This study protocol 
outlines a multimodal investigation designed to (1) compare neuropsychophysiological mechanisms between 
ME/CFS patients and healthy participants, (2) test an integrative model of ME/CFS, (3) identify neuro­
psychophysiological subgroups within the patient population, and (4) identify predictors of symptom response 
during rehabilitation.
Methods and analysis: This study will enroll 115 ME/CFS patients and 55 healthy participants. Groups will be 
comparable in age, sex, and education level, with a larger patient sample enabling subgroup and longitudinal 
analyses. A cross-sectional assessment at baseline will be carried out in both groups. Patients will then be 
evaluated longitudinally throughout a standardized cognitive-behavioral therapy rehabilitation program 
* Corresponding author. ON2 Herestraat 49 - bus 70, KU Leuven, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
E-mail addresses: ynse.dooms@kuleuven.be (Y. Dooms), lixin.qiu@kuleuven.be (L. Qiu), iris.coppieters@vub.be (I. Coppieters), elfi.vergaelen@upckuleuven.be
(E. Vergaelen), stephan.claes@upckuleuven.be (S. Claes), patrick.dupont@kuleuven.be (P. Dupont), melina.hehl@kuleuven.be (M. Hehl), koen.cuypers@uhasselt. 
be (K. Cuypers), Harald.Engler@uk-essen.de (H. Engler), Kirsten.Dombrowski@uk-essen.de (K. Dombrowski), kristin.verbeke@kuleuven.be (K. Verbeke), omer. 
vandenbergh@kuleuven.be
(O. Van den Bergh), jeroen.raes@kuleuven.be
(J. Raes), lukas.vanoudenhove@kuleuven.be
(L. Van Oudenhove), maaike. 
vandenhoute@kuleuven.be (M. Van Den Houte), katleen.bogaerts@uhasselt.be (K. Bogaerts). 
1 Co-senior authorship.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health
journal homepage: www.editorialmanager.com/bbih/default.aspx
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbih.2026.101299
Received 27 February 2026; Received in revised form 9 June 2026; Accepted 5 July 2026  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
Available online 6 July 2026 
2666-3546/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

delivered as routine care. Baseline measures include systemic inflammation and general health biomarkers, 
measures of autonomic and central nervous system function, neuroinflammation (magnetic resonance spec­
troscopy, [18F]DPA714 PET in a subsample), serum short-chain fatty acid levels, gut microbiota composition and 
function, and neuroendocrine and self-reported responses to psychosocial stress. Fatigue severity (physical and 
cognitive) and PEM will be assessed through validated questionnaires, ecological momentary assessment, and 
laboratory tasks. These will be re-evaluated during therapy, and all non-neuroimaging measures will be repeated 
after the rehabilitation program. Statistical analyses will comprise multivariate analysis of variance, general 
linear models, classification algorithms, structural equation models, least absolute shrinkage selection operator 
principal component regression (LASSO-PCR), cluster analysis and latent class growth analysis (LCGA).
1. Introduction
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) is 
a complex and debilitating condition predominantly defined by persis­
tent, intense, and impairing fatigue and by post-exertional malaise 
(PEM), a worsening of symptoms following physical or cognitive exer­
tion (Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria, 2015; Leslie et al., 2023; 
May et al., 2020). This fatigue cannot be alleviated by rest and limits 
daily activities significantly (Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria, 
2015; Fukuda et al., 1994). Besides fatigue, patients often experience 
various other symptoms, such as cognitive problems, orthostatic intol­
erance, muscle or joint pain, headaches, and unrefreshing sleep (Fukuda 
et al., 1994). Several sets of diagnostic criteria exist (Committee on the 
Diagnostic Criteria, 2015; Fukuda et al., 1994). Although the prognosis 
for ME/CFS varies widely, only less than 10% of cases return to the same 
levels of functioning as before disease onset without treatment (Ghali 
et al., 2022). Therapies focusing primarily on symptom management, 
such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and energy management, 
have shown effectiveness in improving wellbeing and quality of life 
(Adamson et al., 2020; Sanal-Hayes et al., 2023; Kuut et al., 2024). 
Analgesics and other pharmacological treatments are also frequently 
used for symptomatic relief (Seton et al., 2024; National Guideline 
Centre (UK), 2021).
Although the precise etiology of ME/CFS remains unclear, ME/CFS is 
believed to have a multifactorial origin (Arron et al., 2024; Dudova 
et al., 2026), where underlying mechanisms are suggested to interact 
in a self-intensifying “vicious cycle” disrupting the body's homeostasis, 
resulting in deterioration of symptoms over time (Nacul et al., 2020).
The resemblance of ME/CFS symptoms to inflammation-induced 
sickness behaviors, such as fatigue, altered sleep and malaise, has 
sparked interest in the role of chronic low-grade inflammation in ME/ 
CFS (Jonsj¨o et al., 2020). Large-scale case-control studies, systematic 
reviews, and a meta-analysis on cytokine profiles reported significantly 
increased levels of CRP, IL-1, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, TGF-β, TNF-β, 
and TNF-α in ME/CFS compared to healthy participants (Corbitt et al., 
2019; Maksoud et al., 2023; Montoya et al., 2017; Blundell et al., 
2015; Strawbridge et al., 2019; Petrov et al., 2025; Domingo et al., 
2021; Kavyani et al., 2024). At the same time, several findings have 
shown decreased levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17A, and IFN-γ 
(Corbitt et al., 2019; Groven et al., 2019; Strawbridge et al., 2019; 
Hornig et al., 2015). However, other recent studies have failed to 
consistently replicate these significant differences (Giloteaux et al., 
2020, 2023; Heng et al., 2025), pointing to considerable divergence in 
the literature and suggesting that immune dysregulation in ME/CFS may 
be more complex. For instance, recent studies investigating cellular 
immunity in ME/CFS reported natural killer (NK) cell dysfunction 
(Maksoud et al., 2023; Sasso et al., 2025; Ramadan et al., 2025), 
including decreased NK cell cytotoxicity (Baraniuk et al., 2024), lower 
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (Sung et al., 2020), 
distinct T-cell phenotypes (Rivas et al., 2018; Petrov et al., 2025; Heng 
et al., 2025), and T-cell exhaustion (Iu et al., 2024; Maya, 2023).
Tilt-table testing, sympathetic skin response tests, heart rate vari­
ability (HRV), and cortisol measurements suggest malfunctions in the 
neuroendocrine stress response system (SRS) in ME/CFS patients 
(Milovanovic et al., 2025; Nelson et al., 2019; Woo et al., 2026; 
Martínez-Martínez 
et 
al., 
2014). 
During 
stress, 
the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)-axis and the autonomic nervous 
system (ANS) are activated to preserve homeostasis (Kazakou et al., 
2023). The majority of the studies showed sympathetic nervous sys­
tem (SNS) predominance in ME/CFS patients compared to healthy 
participants (Milovanovic et al., 2025; Nelson et al., 2019; 
Martínez-Martínez et al., 2014), implying a lack of adaptability to 
changing environmental demands (Martinez-Lavin, 2012). The pre­
ponderance of studies reports that ME/CFS is marked by lower morning 
cortisol levels, suggesting hypocortisolism and HPA-axis down­
regulation (Woo et al., 2026). Additional evidence includes a blunted 
cortisol response to physical and psychological challenges in some, but 
not all, studies (Woo et al., 2026).
The evidence for chronic low-grade systemic inflammation, along 
with the prominent neuropsychological symptoms observed in ME/CFS 
patients, suggests a potential role for neuroinflammation in the path­
ogenesis and persistence of the symptoms, hence the term myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) (VanElzakker 
et al., 2018; Bansal et al., 2025). However, direct evidence for this hy­
pothesis remains sparse (VanElzakker et al., 2018; Bansal et al., 2025). 
Currently, the gold standard for quantifying neuroinflammation in vivo 
in humans is positron emission tomography (PET) targeting the 18-kDa 
translocator protein (TSPO) (VanElzakker et al., 2018). Increases in 
TSPO expression in the brain are indicative of increased density of 
microglia and astrocytes, the primary inflammatory cells in the brain 
(Chaney et al., 2021; Beckers et al., 2018). A small case-control study 
reported increased neuroinflammation in the cingulate cortex, hippo­
campus, amygdala, thalamus, midbrain, and pons in ME/CFS patients 
(Nakatomi et al., 2014). However, a more recent, but equally small, 
study using gold-standard arterial input-based kinetic modeling to 
quantify the PET signal found no evidence of altered TSPO binding in 
patients (Raijmakers et al., 2022). Both studies used PK11195, a 
first-generation TSPO radiotracer which has a poor blood-brain barrier 
permeability and high non-specific binding (Singh et al., 2022; 
VanElzakker et al., 2018). To more robustly evaluate neuro­
inflammation in ME/CFS, there is a need for studies using 
second-generation TSPO tracers and substantially larger samples 
(Bansal et al., 2025). A less direct but less costly and invasive way to 
study neuroinflammation is via magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) 
(Chang et al., 2013). Single-voxel and whole-brain MRS studies 
discovered metabolite abnormalities in the brains of individuals with 
ME/CFS (VanElzakker et al., 2018). Significant group differences for 
choline (CHO) and myo-inositol (MI) in the anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC) suggested neuroinflammation and glial dysfunction in ME/CFS 
patients (Godlewska et al., 2022; Mueller et al., 2020).
Beyond neuroinflammation, a range of other central nervous sys­
tem changes have been investigated using MRI (Almutairi et al., 2020; 
Bansal et al., 2025). The majority of the studies investigating blood 
oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals described that patients 
with ME/CFS had a stronger BOLD response or engaged additional brain 
regions during cognitive tasks as opposed to healthy participants, 
despite having comparable cognitive performances (Shan et al., 2020; 
Almutairi et al., 2020). This may reflect the increased need of neural 
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
2 

resources for a given cognitive effort, leading to elevated fatigue, which 
is demonstrated by the significant associations between increased brain 
activity and fatigue during cognitive tasks in ME/CFS patients (Cook 
et al., 2007). This result is reinforced by absence of BOLD adaptation, 
potentially reflecting energy efficiency, in patients with ME/CFS during 
sustained cognitive tasks (Almutairi et al., 2020). Further, functional 
connectivity findings demonstrate alterations across a number of 
resting-state networks, including the default mode network and salience 
network (Maksoud et al., 2020; van der Schaaf et al., 2024). Scores of 
self-reported fatigue are found to be associated with altered functional 
connectivity patterns (Manca et al., 2021; van der Schaaf et al., 2024).
Alongside these observations in the central nervous system, a 
growing body of evidence points to the gut microbiome dysbiosis in 
ME/CFS (Stallmach et al., 2024). Microorganisms and their metabolites 
prevent (bacterial) antigens from entering the system where they may 
drive immune and metabolic reactions (Stojanov et al., 2020). Alter­
ations in ME/CFS patients included reduced α-diversity and β-diversity 
as well as a diminished Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio (Wang et al., 
2024). This microbiome dysbiosis may cause a reduced production of 
beneficial microbial metabolites like short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) 
(Shen et al., 2025). Decreased SCFA levels are suggested to impact 
cognitive function, fatigue severity, impaired stress resilience, depres­
sive feelings, and unrefreshing sleep via the gut-brain axis (Dalile et al., 
2019), highlighting their possible involvement in ME/CFS.
While this body of work in different neuropsychophysiological do­
mains has substantially advanced our understanding of ME/CFS, the 
current evidence is constrained by several important limitations.
First, disabling fatigue and PEM, though a defining feature in all ME/ 
CFS patients, are subjective and ambiguous, and their perception varies 
widely across patients (Vøllestad and Mengshoel, 2023). Therefore, the 
concept of fatigue cannot be captured by unidimensional scales, 
underscoring the need for multidimensional assessment, covering both 
physical and cognitive dimensions of fatigue (McManimen et al., 2019; 
Tuzzolino et al., 2026).
Second, despite the evidence that multiple neuropsychophysiological 
mechanisms may contribute to the pathophysiology of ME/CFS, the 
interactions between these mechanisms and how they relate to the 
symptom experience are understudied. For instance, the bidirectional 
interaction between the immune pathway and the HPA-axis (Mueller 
et al., 2022), the causal cascades of peripheral inflammation to neuro­
inflammation and their effect on behavioral symptoms (Millett et al., 
2022), the link between fatigue sensations, sympathetic hyperactivity 
and diminished parasympathetic activity (Filippi et al., 2022), and the 
gut-brain communication via bidirectional signalling mechanisms, with 
the mediating function of microbial metabolites on cognition, fatigue 
severity, and depressive symptoms (Dalile et al., 2019; Rathore et al., 
2025) have been shown in healthy participants but not yet in ME/CFS. 
Therefore, an integrative, multimodal approach, measuring neuro­
psychophysiological functioning in different bodily systems in the same 
set of patients, is needed.
Third, existing studies have concentrated primarily on case-control 
differences despite the fact that ME/CFS is known to be a heteroge­
neous disorder, possibly contributing to the contradictory findings in the 
literature (Annesley et al., 2024). Therefore, the identification of 
inter-individual differences within the ME/CFS patient group and 
delineating mechanistic subgroups within the ME/CFS population is a 
critical priority (Annesley et al., 2024).
Fourth, although it is often assumed that neuropsychophysiological 
dysfunctions precede the development or exacerbation of ME/CFS 
symptoms, the temporal direction of these relationships remains unclear 
due to a lack of longitudinal studies (Todhunter-Brown et al., 2025; 
Annesley et al., 2024).
This paper describes the protocol of a comprehensive, multimodal 
study designed to investigate the central, systemic, and peripheral 
neuropsychophysiological mechanisms underlying ME/CFS, and their 
interactions. Given the disabling fatigue and disruptions reported 
among the immune, (neuro)endocrine, autonomic, gastrointestinal, and 
neural function in ME/CFS (Nelson et al., 2019; Woo et al., 2026; Jonsj¨o 
et al., 2020; Almutairi et al., 2020; VanElzakker et al., 2018; Stallmach 
et al., 2024), the first objective of our study is to compare these mech­
anisms between a well-characterized, large sample of ME/CFS patients 
and healthy participants. Secondly, we want to test the interactions 
between the stress response system, the immune system, the brain, and 
the gut microbiota and their metabolites in ME/CFS patients, as such 
interactions have been shown in healthy participants (Dalile et al., 2019; 
Filippi et al., 2022; Mueller et al., 2022; Rathore et al., 2025). Third, we 
want to identify subgroups of ME/CFS patients based on inter-individual 
differences in pathophysiological characteristics, including multidi­
mensional measurement of fatigue and fatigability severity (Annesley 
et al., 2024). Lastly, we want to investigate to what extent the patho­
physiological profile at baseline predicts response to a standardized 
ME/CFS-specific CBT-based rehabilitation program, and to investigate 
to what extent this pathophysiological profile is changed after treat­
ment, in line with previous outcomes linking physiological character­
istics to symptom severity (Montoya et al., 2017; Manca et al., 2021; 
Nakatomi et al., 2014). See Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1 for an 
overview of objectives, research questions, measured variables, and 
planned analysis methods.
2. Methods
2.1. Experimental design
This mechanistic study combines a cross-sectional case-control part 
(“baseline”) and a longitudinal part in which patients are followed-up 
during and after routine care (i.e. a standardized CBT rehabilitation 
program) (“follow-up”) (Fig. 1). The first three objectives will be 
addressed using baseline data, while the fourth objective will be 
addressed using baseline and follow-up data. Patients with ME/CFS and 
healthy participants will be first assessed at baseline throughout a 
clinical assessment visit (T1), a brain imaging visit (T2), a lab-based 
testing moment (T3) and home assessments (Fig. 1). Patients will then 
be followed throughout standardized clinical care, a CBT rehabilitation 
program. Follow-up measurements will take place after ten and fifteen 
therapy sessions. During both follow-up moments, patients will again 
perform the home assessments. After fifteen sessions, a lab-based testing 
moment (T4), similar to T3, will be performed (Fig. 2). To minimize the 
effects of the circadian rhythm on the neuro-endocrine stress response 
system and to standardize blood collection, T3 and T4 will always take 
place in the afternoon (between 12:00 and 18:00). Participants will be 
instructed to abstain from alcohol consumption and strenuous exercise 
for 24 hours prior to each test session and ensure adequate rest the night 
before. They will also be asked to avoid caffeine and smoking in the 
morning of T3 and T4 and to not brush their teeth or chew gum within 
2 h of its start. All measurements will be conducted at University Hos­
pitals Leuven (Leuven, Belgium) or at the participant's home. Ethical 
approval was obtained from the Ethical Committee Research UZ/KU 
Leuven (Ref. S66452). Data collection started in February 2023 and is 
expected to finish in December 2026.
2.2. Standardized rehabilitation program
The CBT rehabilitation program is part of the standard clinical care 
of CFS patients in Belgium delivered by licensed cognitive behavioral 
therapists according to the program guidelines. It is reimbursed and 
bound by convention by the Belgian National Institute for Health and 
Invalidity Insurance (RIZIV/INAMI). More details on the program are in 
Supplement.
2.3. Participants
We will recruit 115 patients diagnosed with ME/CFS after a 
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
3 

Table 1 
ME/CFS = myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, SRS = stress response system, SCFAs = short chain fatty acids, GLM = general linear model, 
SEM = structural equation model, LASSO-PCR = least absolute shrinkage and selection operator-regularized principal component regression, LCGA = latent class 
growth analysis, PLS= partial least squares.
Objectives
Research questions
Observed variables
Main statistical method
Design
1.To compare the 
neuropsychophysiological 
mechanisms between ME/CFS 
patients and healthy participants
1.Does the functionality of these 
neuropsychophysiological mechanisms differ 
between ME/CFS patients and healthy 
participants?
Input 
variable
Group
Independent t-tests, 
(multivariate) analysis of 
variance, linear mixed 
models, GLMs and 
classification algorithms
Cross- 
sectional
Outcome 
variables
SRS (Baseline)
Immune system 
(Baseline)
fMRI + ASL + MRS +
PET (Baseline)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline)
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline)
2.To test the interactions between the 
neuropsychophysiological 
mechanisms in ME/CFS
1.Are the functionalities of the stress-response 
system, the immune system, the brain, and the 
gut + SCFAs related to each other in patients 
with ME/CFS?
Input +
outcome 
variables
SRS (Baseline)
Regressions in SEM
Immune system 
(Baseline)
fMRI + ASL + MRS 
(Baseline)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline)
2.Are these physiological mechanisms related 
to fatigue perception (i.e., physical and 
cognitive fatigability) and severity of cognitive 
and physical fatigue symptom in patients with 
ME/CFS?
Input 
variables
SRS (Baseline)
Multiple regressions, 
LASSO-PCR, PLS 
regression
Immune system 
(Baseline)
fMRI + ASL + MRS +
PET (Baseline)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline)
Outcome 
variables
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline)
3.Do alterations in neural/neurochemical 
function mediate the relationship between the 
physiological mechanisms and symptom 
perception/severity?
Input 
variables
SRS (Baseline)
Principle directions of 
mediation, GLM mediation 
models
Immune system 
(Baseline)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline)
Mediator 
variables
fMRI + ASL + MRS +
PET (Baseline)
Outcome 
variables
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline)
3.To identify subgroups of ME/CFS 
patients based on inter-individual 
differences
1.Can we divide the ME/CFS patients in 
subgroups using multiple lab-based and 
ecological neuropsychophysiological and 
symptom perception measurements?
Input 
variables
SRS (Baseline)
Normal mixture models 
and multiple co-clustering
Immune system 
(Baseline)
fMRI + ASL + MRS 
(Baseline)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline)
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline)
Outcome 
variable
Clusters in patient 
sample
4.To use these subgroups as potential 
predictors of longitudinal effects 
throughout treatment
1.To evaluate treatment response
Outcome 
variables
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline, follow-up 1, 
follow-up 2)
Linear mixed models
Longitudinal
Quality of life via self- 
report questionnaires 
(Baseline, follow-up 1, 
follow-up 2)
Activity levels 
(Baseline, follow-up 1, 
follow-up 2)
2.To test whether the mechanisms and patient 
clusters predict longitudinal effects throughout 
treatment
Input 
variable
Clusters in patient 
sample
Adding cluster 
membership as categorical 
predictor to the linear 
mixed models and LCGA
Outcome 
variables
SRS (Baseline, follow- 
up 1, follow-up 2)
Immune system 
(Baseline, follow-up 2)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline, 
follow-up 2)
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline, follow-up 1, 
follow-up 2)
3.To identify the mechanisms underlying 
treatment response trajectories by 
investigating directionality of the relationships 
between cognitive and physical fatigability, 
clinical symptom severity over time and 
neuropsychophysiological dysfunctions.
Input 
variables
SRS (Baseline)
Multiple regressions, 
LASSO-PCR, PLS 
regression
Immune system 
(Baseline)
fMRI + ASL + MRS +
PET (Baseline)
Gut + SCFAs (Baseline)
Fatigue and fatigability 
(Baseline)
(continued on next page)
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
4 

comprehensive assessment by internists and psychiatrists with special­
ized expertise in fatigue evaluation. Patients will be recruited in the 
Multidisciplinary Diagnostic Center for ME/CFS of the University Hos­
pitals Leuven, the only multidisciplinary center for ME/CFS recognized 
by the Belgian National Institute for Health and Invalidity Insurance 
(RIZIV/INAMI). Until February 29th, 2024, the Multidisciplinary Diag­
nostic Center employed the 1994 Center of Disease Control criteria 
(Fukuda et al., 1994) for diagnosis; from March 1st, 2024, onwards, the 
NICE criteria (National Guideline Centre. NICE Evidence Reviews 
Collection, 2021) are employed. Patients suffering from major depres­
sive disorder or patients reporting pain, rather than fatigue, as their 
primary symptom, do not receive the ME/CFS diagnosis. Patients diag­
nosed outside the Multidisciplinary Diagnostic Center will be considered 
for inclusion only if their diagnostic procedure is comparable to that 
employed at the Multidisciplinary Diagnostic Center, and provided that 
at least 10 years have passed since the completion of their standard 
clinical care program for ME/CFS. They will not be included in the 
longitudinal study. Fifty-five healthy controls (HC) will be recruited via 
local outreach. HC will be selected in a manner that ensures their sex, 
age, and educational degree distributions are comparable to those of the 
patients. Details about the exclusion criteria can be found in 
Supplement.
2.4. Sample size
The aspired participant numbers reflect expected feasibility based on 
patient flow in the hospital's Multidisciplinary Diagnostic Center and the 
available budget. The sample size represents the intended number of 
participants completing baseline measurements. In case of dropouts, 
additional participants will be recruited to achieve the targeted sample 
size. The aimed sample size yields 80% power to detect group differ­
ences in physiological, neurological and symptom parameters, and to 
detect 4 equally sized clusters (Dalmaijer et al., 2022). The sample size is 
also sufficient to perform latent class growth analysis (LCGA) (Dalmaijer 
et al., 2022), and least absolute shrinkage selection operator principal 
component regression (LASSO-PCR) (Cui and Gong, 2018). More 
Table 1 (continued)
Objectives 
Research questions 
Observed variables 
Main statistical method 
Design
Outcome 
variables +
input 
variables
SRS (follow-up 1)
Fatigue and fatigability 
(follow-up 1)
Outcome 
variables
SRS (follow-up 2)
Immune system 
(follow-up 2)
Gut + SCFAs (follow- 
up 2)
Fatigue and fatigability 
(follow-up 2)
Fig. 1. Overview of the cross-sectional and longitudinal parts of the study design. MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, PET/MR = positron emission tomography/ 
magnetic resonance, HRV = heart rate variability, SCFA = short chain fatty acids, CBT = cognitive behavioral therapy, GAD-7 = Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7, 
PHQ-9 = Patient Health Questionnaire-9, PHQ-15 = Patient Health Questionnaire-15, CTQ=Childhood Trauma Questionnaire, TEC = Traumatic Experience 
Checklist, CIS-20 = Checklist Individual Strength-20, FMPS=Frost Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale, ISAQ= Interoceptive Sensitivity and Attention Question­
naire, SF-36 = 36-Item Short Form Health Survey, NCP-Q= Need for Controllability and Predictability questionnaire.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
5 

information on power calculations is in Supplement.
2.5. Measures
2.5.1. Primary outcome variables
2.5.1.1. Systemic inflammation. To assess systemic inflammation, 15 mL 
venous blood will be drawn from the participant's antecubital vein into 
serum-separator tubes (Vacutainers; Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, 
NJ). The serum will be separated and stored at −80◦C until analysis. 
Serum levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10 and IFN-γ will be 
quantified by multiplex electrochemiluminescence immunoassay using 
the V-PLEX Human Proinflammatory Panel 1 kit, and TGF-β will be 
measured using the U-PLEX Human TGF-β1 Assay, both from Meso Scale 
Diagnostics (Rockville, MD), following the manufacturer's instructions. 
Analyses will be performed at the Institute of Medical Psychology and 
Behavioral Immunobiology (University Hospital Essen, Germany). High 
sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) will be measured using a latex-enhanced 
immunoturbidimetry test (COBAS 8000, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan/Roche 
Diagnostics, IN, USA) at the Laboratory Medicine Department (UZ 
Leuven). Details on used assays are in Supplement.
2.5.1.2. General health biomarkers. A 4 mL blood sample will be 
collected from the participant's antecubital vein into EDTA tubes 
(Vacutainers, Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) for the assessment 
of complete blood counts, a lipid profile, inflammatory markers and a 
metabolic, liver, and renal panel. An overview of general health bio­
markers can be found in Supplement. Blood analyses will be performed 
immediately upon collection at the Laboratory Medicine Department 
(UZ Leuven). Additionally, fasting blood glucose will be determined 
with a glucometer (GlucoMen areo, Menarini Diagnostics, Florence, 
Italia).
2.5.1.3. Heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV). Electrocar­
diogram (ECG) recordings will be made with a two-channel ECG 
monitor (Firstbeat Bodyguard 3, Firstbeat Technologies Oy, Jyv¨askyl¨a, 
Finland). Electrodes (Kendall electrodes, Medi-Trace, Belgium) will be 
positioned similar to RA and LL positions. Patients will be monitored for 
10 consecutive minutes in rest and during a mental arithmetic task 
(PASAT, see “2.5.1.7 Fatigue and fatigability lab measures”).
Extracted interbeat intervals will be visually inspected and processed 
offline using ARTiiFACT software (Kaufmann et al., 2011). HR and time 
domain indices of HRV will be calculated by assessing the root mean 
squares of successive RR interval differences (RMSSD). RMSSD is the 
primary time-domain measure in research as it provides a highly rele­
vant and accurate measure of short-term autonomic nervous system 
activity (Shaffer and Ginsberg, 2017; Amekran et al., 2025; Minarini, 
2020).
2.5.1.4. Gut microbiota composition. Participants will be instructed to 
collect a stool sample at home and to determine stool consistency by 
means of the provided Bristol Stool Score chart (Vandeputte et al., 2016; 
Lewis and Heaton, 1997). Participants will be instructed to store the 
sample in their −18◦C home freezer until delivery to the lab. Cooling 
elements and cooler bags will be used for transport. After receipt, fecal 
samples will be stored at −80◦C. Fecal samples will be analysed via 1) 
shotgun metagenomic sequencing/analysis, transcriptomic analysis, 
metabolomic analysis, 16S/18S/ITS amplicon sequencing analysis, 2) 
isolation and cultivating gut microorganisms and 3) bacterial cell count 
using flow cytometry after dilution of the stool samples aliquots. Addi­
tionally, fecal calprotectin will be analysed as a measure of 
gut-inflammation via ELISA as well as moisture content (a proxy for 
transit time) through lyophilizing the aliquots. Analyses will be per­
formed by the Raes lab (VIB-KU Leuven Center for Microbiology, 
Leuven, Belgium).
2.5.1.5. Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). To assess SCFAs levels, 4 ml 
venous blood will be collected in serum-separator tubes (Vacutainers, 
Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). The serum will be separated and 
stored at −80◦C until analysis. Acetate, butyrate and propionate con­
centrations will be determined using gas chromatography-mass spec­
trometry (GC-MS) (Trace 1300 GC and DSQ II XL, Thermo Electron 
Corporation, Waltham, MA, USA) following derivatization with 2,4- 
difluoroaniline and extraction in ethyl acetate (Vandermeulen et al., 
2024). Details in Supplement.
2.5.1.6. Salivary cortisol response to psychosocial stress. The Maastricht 
Acute Stress Test (MAST) (Smeets et al., 2012) includes a 5-min in­
struction phase, a 10-min stress induction phase, and a 55-min recovery 
period (Fig. 3). The stress induction phase consists of alternations be­
tween cold water hand immersion trials (6◦C) and mental arithmetic 
trials, with trial durations varying between 45 and 90 s. Social stressors 
are added by giving negative feedback after mistakes and mock video­
taping. The MAST elicits a robust physiological and subjective stress 
response (Smeets et al., 2012). For the assessment of the salivary cortisol 
response, saliva samples will be collected with Salivette Cortisol 
Fig. 2. Outline of the lab-based testing moments (T3 and T4). HRV = heart rate variability, MAST = Maastricht Acute Stress Task, PASAT= Paced Auditory Serial 
Attention Task, SCFA = short-chain fatty acids, FES = fatigue and energy scale.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
6 

(Sarstedt AG & Co., Nümbrecht, Germany) before the instruction phase 
and seven times after the stress induction phase (t+00, t+05, t+15, 
t+25, t+35, t+45, t+55) (Fig. 3). Samples will be centrifuged immedi­
ately after collection and stored at −20◦C until enzyme-linked immu­
nosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis (TECAN, RE52611) (assay details in 
Supplement) at the Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral 
Immunobiology (University Hospital Essen, Germany) according to the 
manufacturer's guidelines. Participants will rate subjective stress at 
baseline, during instructions, and in the middle of and after the stress 
induction phase by scoring the stressfulness, painfulness and unpleas­
antness of the test on a visual analogue scale (VAS) ranging from 0: not 
at all, to 10: extremely.
2.5.1.7. Fatigue and fatigability lab measures. To measure increases in 
and recovery from cognitive fatigue following a cognitive challenge, 
participants will perform a modified version of the Paced Auditory Serial 
Attention Task (PASAT), a task requiring working-memory retrieval, 
shown to significantly increase cognitive fatigue in ME/CFS patients 
(Cook et al., 2007). Participants will listen to a pre-recorded sequence of 
numbers between one and nine, and are instructed to press a button 
every time two consecutive numbers add up to ten. Each number will be 
presented for 1500 ms and separated by 500 ms. Additionally, partici­
pants have to pay attention to a screen displaying rapidly (every 500 ms) 
and randomly changing numbers, increasing the attentional demands of 
the auditory task. The task will be presented three times for 3 min with 
30-s breaks in between (Cook et al., 2007). State fatigue is measured 
with a Dutch translation of the Fatigue and Energy Scale (FES), a vali­
dated scale capturing the post-exertional aggravation of physical and 
mental fatigue in response to activities in the lab or in real life (Keech 
et al., 2015). Participants have to fill in the FES prior to the task, at 
both 30-s breaks, immediately after the task, and 1 h, 4 h and 24 h after 
finishing the task to monitor their fatigue.
To measure physical fatigability, a 25-min cycling task will be per­
formed on an arm-leg cycling ergometer (AirBike inSPORTline Pro, 
SEVEN SPORT s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic) similar to the procedure 
described in Keech et al. (2015) . This test is shown to induce significant 
physical fatigue in ME/CFS patients. The cycling rate will be individu­
ally calibrated by monitoring the heart rate by a chest band (Polar T34, 
Polar Electro, Kempele, Finland). Initially, participants will be asked to 
increase their pedaling rate until they reach 70% of their age-predicted 
maximal heart rate (=208 −(0.7 * age)). For the remainder of the test, 
the pedaling rate will be regularly adjusted to maintain this heart rate 
within a 3 beats per minute error margin. Before, immediately after, and 
1 h, 4 h, and 24 h after the task, participants will score perceived 
physical fatigue with the FES (Keech et al., 2015).
Fatigability in both tasks will be quantified as the increase in fatigue 
from baseline to after the task, while recovery failure will be investi­
gated by comparing ratings before and immediately after vs 1, 4 and 24 
h after task completion.
2.5.1.8. Ecological measurements. Via the experience sampling method 
(ESM), we will be able to measure dynamic experiences in the daily life 
of the patients (Myin-Germeys et al., 2018). During seven consecutive 
days, patients will be requested to fill in a brief, momentary survey ten 
times per day (Myin-Germeys and Kuppens, 2026; Klippel et al., 2022). 
Requests will be sent through the m-Path smartphone application, a 
GDPR-compliant platform. Self-reported data about levels of stress and 
nervosity (Achterhof et al., 2022; Cohen et al., 1988; Vaessen et al., 
2023), levels of mental and physical fatigue (Keech et al., 2015), 
levels of arousal and valence (Heininga et al., 2019; Hodes et al., 1985; 
Lang, 1980), levels of physical and mental activity and behavioral re­
sponses to it (Barge-Schaapveld et al., 1999; Nap-van der Vlist et al., 
2021; Worm-Smeitink et al., 2021), rest, somatic symptoms (Yoshiuchi 
et al., 2007; Maes et al., 2022), and use of substances (Matcham et al., 
2019) will be collected in the person's natural environment (see 
Supplementary Table 2 for details on the questions and answer options). 
The requests will be sent in a semi-randomized way, with 8 one-hour 
blocks evenly distributed across the participant's entire daily wakeful­
ness period. Within the 1 hour blocks, the surveys will be sent at a 
random moment (Myin-Germeys and Kuppens, 2026) (Supplementary 
Fig. 1). In addition, respondents will also fill out a daily morning 
questionnaire (Buysse et al., 1989; Simor et al., 2009; Fraser et al., 
2025), assessing sleep duration and perceived sleep quality, and an 
evening questionnaire, evaluating general feelings of fatigue and mood 
throughout the day (Nap-van der Vlist et al., 2021; Wackerhagen et al., 
2023; Keech et al., 2015). At the end of the week, a debriefing survey 
Fig. 3. Design of the Maastricht Acute Stress Test (MAST). HIT = hand immersion trial, MA = mental arithmetic task, VAS = visual analogue scale.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
7 

will be sent to get some insights in how the study went from the par­
ticipant's point of view (e.g. asking questions such as ‘Did the ESM 
period influence your mood?‘) (Myin-Germeys and Kuppens, 2026).
Additionally, during the same seven days, participants will wear a 
device (Chill+, Imec, Leuven, Belgium) day and night except during 
strenuous physical activities or water-related tasks. After implementing 
a signal quality indicator and algorithms for physiological feature se­
lection, heart rate and pulse, electrodermal activity (EDA), skin tem­
perature, and motion/activity levels (via 3D accelerometry) can be 
quantified.
After synchronization, the data from the wearable and the responses 
to the daily life questionnaires can together provide an overview of the 
functionality of the SRS in a non-laboratory setting. Additionally, 
physical fatigability in daily life can be assessed by modeling changes in 
momentary fatigue levels, measured with ESM, following challenging 
situations identified through ambulatory physiological data, actigraphy, 
and ESM responses.
2.5.1.9. Neuroimaging 
2.5.1.9.1. MRI scan protocol. MRI scanning will be carried out on a 
3T Philips Achieva DStream scanner with a 32-channel head coil. MRI 
acquisition will start with a T1-weighted 3D turbo-field-echo sequence 
anatomical scan. Next, brain metabolites will be examined with 1H-MRS 
using a Point Resolved Spectroscopy (PRESS) sequence. The sequence 
will allow us to non-invasively investigate levels of myo-inositol and 
choline. Based on significant case-control findings from previous MRS 
studies in ME/CFS (Godlewska et al., 2022; Mueller et al., 2020), 
single-voxel MRS will be performed in the pregenual anterior cingulate 
cortex (pACC). Details on positioning of the voxel are in Supplement. 
Afterwards, neural responses to psychosocial stress will be quantified 
using the Montreal Imaging Stress Test (MIST, Dedovic et al., 2005) 
during a functional MRI scan (blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD)) 
conducted with a Gradient Echo (EPI - Echo Planar Imaging) acquisition 
sequence. The MIST consists of four runs in which three conditions [rest, 
control, and experimental (i.e. stress)] are alternated in a block design 
(Fig. 4). Next, a resting-state fMRI scan with a Gradient Echo (EPI) 
acquisition sequence will be acquired in order to assess functional 
connectivity. Finally, cerebral blood perfusion will be quantified with a 
Pseudo-Continuous Arterial Spin Labeling (pCASL) sequence. The MRI 
procedure will last approximately 70 minutes. Details on the scanning 
protocol are in Supplement.
2.5.1.9.2. PET/MR scan protocol. A subset of the sample (ME/CFS: 
N = 30, HC: N = 20) will undergo simultaneous MRI and PET scanning 
with a General Electric (GE, Milwaukee, WI, USA) Signa PET/MR 
equipped with time-of-flight (TOF) PET and a 3-T MRI system with an 8- 
channel head coil. MRI sequences include 1) 3D volumetric T1-weighted 
BRAVO scan , 2) MRS scan with Probe-P (JPRESS) sequence , 3) Zero 
Echo Time (ZTE) scan for PET attenuation correction , 4) four fMRI MIST 
runs with gradient echo pulse sequence , 5) resting-state fMRI scan with 
gradient echo pulse sequence , 6) ASL scan with 3D pCASL sequence. 
Simultaneously, dynamic 3D PET scans will be acquired for 60 min after 
a single intravenous injection of 120-150 MBq 18F-DPA714. Twenty 2 
mL and five 5 mL arterial blood samples will be collected during the scan 
to allow for full kinetic modeling. Radioactivity in the 20 blood samples 
will be determined with a gamma counter that is cross-calibrated with 
the PET-MR scanner. The full scanning protocol at the PET/MR lasts 
approximately 75 min. Details are in Supplement.
2.5.2. Participant characterization
2.5.2.1. TSPO binding affinity. To enable reliable quantification of 
tracer binding, 10 mL of blood will be collected from the antecubital 
Fig. 4. Montreal Imaging Stress Task (MIST) protocol. R = rest condition, C = control condition, S = stress (experimental) condition.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
8 

vein for genotyping in PET-eligible participants. A polymorphism in the 
human 18kDa TSPO, rs6971, gives rise to three distinct binding affinity 
profiles: high-, medium-, and low-affinity binders. Only individuals 
identified as high- or medium-affinity binders will be eligible for in­
clusion in the PET procedure, and binding affinity will be controlled for 
in all PET analysis. Analysis comprises DNA extraction and genetic 
sequencing carried out by the KU Leuven Center for Human Genetics and 
Genomics Core as described by Schroyen et al. (2021).
2.5.2.2. Psychiatric comorbidity. Psychiatric comorbidity will be evalu­
ated using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Simplified 
(MINI-S) for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5 
(DSM-5) (Overbeek and Schruers, 2019), a semi-structured interview 
evaluating the DSM-V criteria for the seventeen most common axis-I 
disorders.
2.5.2.3. Self-report questionnaires. Participants completed question­
naires screening for the 1994 CDC criteria (Fukuda et al., 1994) and 
2015 IOM criteria for ME/CFS (Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria, 
2015), the 2010 American College of Rheumatology criteria for fibro­
myalgia (Wolfe et al., 2010), and the Rome IV diagnostic criteria for 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (Drossman and Hasler, 2016). Further­
more, they completed the Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) 
(Spitzer et al., 2006), Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) (Kroenke 
et al., 2001), Patient Health Questionnaire-15 (PHQ-15) (Kroenke et al., 
2002), Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) (Bernstein et al., 1994), 
Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS) Trait version (Watson et al., 
1988), Traumatic Experiences Checklist (TEC) (Nijenhuis et al., 1999), 
Checklist individual strength (CIS-20) (Vercoulen et al., 1994), Frost 
Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (FMPS) (Frost et al., 1990), 
Interoceptive Sensitivity and Attention Questionnaire (ISAQ) (Bogaerts 
et al., 2023), The Medical Outcome Study Short Form – 36 items 
(SF-36) (Ware et al., 1993; Ware and Keller, 1994), Need for Control­
lability and Predictability questionnaire (NCPQ) (Ramakers et al., 
2025), and COVID-related questions. Details on the questionnaires and 
scoring are in Supplement.
2.5.2.4. Demographics. We will record sex, age, socioeconomic infor­
mation, lifestyle factors (e.g., smoking, substance use, fitness, dietary 
history), medication use, education level, diet, clinical history (e.g., ME/ 
CFS-related: duration of symptoms, time since diagnosis), general per­
sonal and family medical history, and treatment history via a stan­
dardized self-created survey. Anthropometric measures such as height 
and weight will be measured in the lab during the study visit.
2.5.2.5. Dietary intake. Participants will monitor their daily dietary 
intake for three days using the MyFitnessPal app. They will enter each 
food item consumed, along with the quantity of each item.
2.6. Neuroimaging data
2.6.1. Preprocessing
2.6.1.1. Task-based fMRI (Montreal Imaging Stress Test). Source data 
from the scanner will be converted from DICOM format into The Brain 
Imaging Data Structure (BIDS)specification prior to preprocessing. 
Mriqc version 0.16.0 will be used for quality control purposes. (f)MRI 
Preprocessing will be performed using fMRIPrep 20.2.6 (RRID: 
SCR_016216) (Esteban et al., 2018, 2019). Quality control and pre­
processing details can be found in Supplement.
2.6.1.2. Functional connectivity. After preprocessing using fMRIPrep 
20.2.6 (RRID:SCR_016216) (Esteban et al., 2018, 2019), analyses of 
resting-state 
fMRI 
data 
will 
be 
performed 
using 
CONN 
(Whitfield-Gabrieli and Nieto-Castanon, 2012) (RRID:SCR_009550) 
release 22.v2407 (Nieto-Castanon, 2022a) and SPM (Penny WF et al., 
2011) (RRID:SCR_007037) release 12.7771. Details on data pre­
processing and denoising can be found in Supplement.
2.6.1.3. PET. Preprocessing will be done with in-house scripts using 
MATLAB (R2021a, Natick, MA: The MathWorks Inc.) based on SPM12 
(v7771, Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College 
London). The volume of distribution (VT) of 18F-DPA714 will be quan­
tified using a plasma-input based 2 tissue 4K model with an additional 
component describing irreversible endothelial binding and taking into 
account a fraction of whole blood in predefined ROIs and in parcels of 
the Canlab 2024 combined atlas (Supplementary Table 3). VT is the 
primary outcome measure. For the ROI and parcel based analysis we will 
also estimate K1 and use this as a proxy for blood-brain barrier integrity 
(Maccioni et al., 2024).
2.6.1.4. MRS. Data will be processed in the Osprey Toolbox v.2.9.0 
(Oeltzschner et al., 2020) in MATLAB (R2021a, Natick, MA: The 
MathWorks Inc.) following standardized procedures for preprocessing 
and linear-combination modeling. Choline (CHO) and myo-inositol (MI) 
quantification will be performed as markers of neuroinflammation. 
Total N-Acetylaspartate (tNAA), a proxy marker of neuronal health 
(Clark, 1998), and glutamate/glutamine (Glx), amino acids important in 
neuronal regulation (Andersen et al., 2021), concentrations will be 
assessed in an explorative way. Metabolite concentrations (institutional 
units (i.u.)) will be water-scaled using the unsuppressed water as a 
reference signal. Details on preprocessing and quality parameters can be 
found in Supplement. Fig. 5 shows an exemplary voxel position and 
spectra after model fit.
2.6.2. ROI definition
2.6.2.1. Task-based fMRI (Montreal Imaging Stress Test). ROIs for task- 
based analyses (MIST) were selected based on their consistent associa­
tion with stress across prior meta-analyses (Berretz et al., 2021; Kogler 
et al., 2015; Mothersill and Donohoe, 2016; Qiu et al., 2022) (details 
in Supplement). An overview of the included regions is illustrated in 
Fig. 6.
2.6.2.2. Functional connectivity. ROIs for functional connectivity anal­
ysis were defined based on previous case-control and intervention 
studies in ME/CFS populations (Manca et al., 2021; Boissoneault et al., 
2016, 2018; Kim et al., 2015; Li et al., 2022; Su et al., 2023; Wortinger 
et al., 2016, 2017) (details in Supplement). Included ROIs are presented 
in Fig. 6.
2.6.2.3. PET. ROIs were selected based on prior TSPO PET studies in 
affective and functional somatic disorders (De Picker et al., 2023), 
including major depressive disorder (Cakmak et al., 2022; Hadjikhani 
et al., 2020; Hannestad et al., 2013; Holmes et al., 2018; Joo et al., 
2021; Li et al., 2018; Richards et al., 2018; Setiawan et al., 2015, 
2018), fibromyalgia (Albrecht et al., 2019a; Mueller et al., 2023), 
chronic pain (Jeon et al., 2017; Albrecht et al., 2019b, 2021; Hadjikhani 
et al., 2020; Loggia et al., 2015; Torrado-Carvajal et al., 2021), ME/CFS 
(Nakatomi et al., 2014) and functional somatic syndromes (Matsudaira 
et al., 2020) (See Fig. 6) Details are explained in Supplement.
2.7. Statistical analysis plan
Except stated otherwise, statistics will be performed using SAS An­
alytics Software 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), JMP® Pro 18 (JMP 
Statistical Discovery LLC, Cary, NC, USA), JASP (Version 0.95.4) and 
MATLAB R2023a (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA).
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
9 

2.7.1. Objective 1: comparison of neuropsychophysiological measures 
between ME/CFS patients and healthy participants
2.7.1.1. SRS, SCFAs, fatigue/fatigability, immune markers. For objective 
1 (see Table 1), we will compare SRS, SCFAs, immune and fatigability 
outcomes between patients with ME/CFS and healthy participants using 
(multivariate) one-way analysis of variance [(M)ANOVA] for the 
different (groups of) outcomes. For outcomes measured repeatedly 
during the test session (i.e. ratings and physiological measures in 
response to tasks), linear mixed models will be used, with time and 
group (ME/CFS patients versus healthy participants) as the fixed factors. 
When appropriate, multiple testing corrections will be applied using 
positive false discovery rates (FDR; qFDR) (Storey, 2002; Storey et al., 
2003) (i.e. when the estimated number of true significances by the 
bootstrap 
and/or 
spline 
procedure 
>0), 
otherwise 
standard 
Benjamini-Hochberg FDR (pFDR) will be used (Benjamini and Hochberg, 
1995) and covariates will be controlled (ANCOVA) when appropriate.
2.7.1.2. Gut microbiome. Analysis for the gut microbiome data will 
happen in R primarily through the packages vegan, phyloseq, and coda. 
base, which offer key functionalities for gut microbiome data analysis. 
Statistical analyses will include computing and comparing diversity 
metrics, evaluating overall microbial composition via ordination 
methods, and identifying group differences and associations with host 
metadata. Generalized linear models will be used to account for con­
founding factors, including metabolic health. More details are in 
Supplement.
2.7.1.3. Brain task-based fMRI. Second-level fixed effects analysis, 
comparing patients and healthy participants, will be performed on first- 
level stress minus control contrasts using GLMs implemented in MAT­
LAB scripts calling CANlab and SPM12 functions.
Whole-brain voxel-wise GLMs using a gray matter mask will be 
performed, using a voxel-wise threshold of qFDR < 0.05. The whole-brain 
analyses will be complemented by ROI-based (M)ANOVAs with positive 
Fig. 5. Representation of exemplary magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) raw spectra and voxel positions. The myo-inositol (MI), choline (CHO), glutamate/ 
glutamine (Glx), N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peaks are highlighted in gray. Exemplary voxel position for the pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (pACC) is highlighted 
in white. Spectra adapted from Clarke et al. (2025) (Clarke et al.; Clarke and Jbabdi, 2025). Brain adapted from MRIcroGL (v1.2.20220720) (Rorden, 2025).
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
10 

FDR correction (qFDR < 0.05) (see “2.6.2 ROI definition” for ROI selec­
tion and justification). GLM analyses will be corrected for scanner type 
(MR vs. PET/MR) (fixed effect). Whole brain multivariate mediation 
analysis will be performed using the “principal directions of mediation” 
(PDM) method (Chen et al., 2015; Geuter et al., 2020) in order to study 
brain patterns mediating case-control differences in self-reported NA 
during the MIST. Analyses will be done using the CANlab mediation 
toolbox and will be thresholded voxel-wise at qFDR < 0.05. Finally, 
multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) will be employed with The 
Decoding Toolbox (Hebart et al., 2014) to train and cross-validate 
(k-fold) a Support Vector Machines classifier to distinguish ME/CFS 
patients from healthy controls based on their brain response to stress. 
Statistical significance (voxel-wise p-values) will be estimated using 
5000 permutation tests, preserving group distribution in each fold 
during the label shuffling. Details are in Supplement.
2.7.1.4. Brain resting-state fMRI. Resting-state functional connectivity 
will be determined via ROI-to-ROI connectivity among 38 ROIs (see 
“2.6.2 ROI definition” for ROI selection and justification) analysis using 
multivariate GLM (with CONN (Whitfield-Gabrieli and Nieto-Castanon, 
2012) (RRID:SCR_009550) release 22.v2407 (Nieto-Castanon, 2022a) 
and SPM (Penny WF et al., 2011) (RRID:SCR_007037) release 12.7771). 
Results will be thresholded using a combination of uncorrected p < 0.01 
at connection-level threshold and familywise error corrected (pFWE <
0.05) at ROI-level (ROI mass/intensity). Graph Theoretical Analysis will 
be performed with the GraphVar Toolbox (Kruschwitz et al., 2015; 
Waller et al., 2018) version 2.03a. Group comparisons will be performed 
with one-way ANOVAs and MANOVAs. Positive FDR correction (qFDR <
Fig. 6. Overview of the regions of interest (ROIs) included in the neuroimaging analyses. ROIs for fMRI during the Montreal Imaging Stress Task (MIST): 
A = thalamus, B = inferior frontal gyrus, C = anterior insula, D = amygdala. ROIs for PET: I. = anterior insula, II. = posterior insula, III. = thalamus, IV. = hippo­
campus, V. = primary somatosensory cortex (S1), VI. = anterior midcingulate cortex (aMCC), VII. = subgenual cingulate cortex (sgACC). ROIs for resting-state fMRI 
(rsfMRI): 1 = anterior insula, 2 = posterior insula, 3 = auditory association cortex, 4 = temporal parietal occipital junction (TPOJ), 5 = premotor cortex, 6 = caudate, 
7 = globus pallidus, 8 = thalamus, 9 = dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), 10 = frontal pole, 11 = dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), 12 = anterior mid- 
cingulate cortex (aMCC), 13 = somatomotor paracentral cortex, 14 = primary motor cortex (M1), 15 = superior parietal lobe (SPL), 16 = precuneus, 17 = middle 
temporal gyrus (MTG), 18 = primary somatosensory cortex (S1), 19 = inferior parietal lobe (IPL). ROI for the Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS): pregenual 
anterior cingulate cortex (pACC). ROIs are always bilateral.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
11 

0.05) will be applied when appropriate, otherwise standard 
Benjamini-Hochberg FDR will be used (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). 
Furthermore, Partial Least Squares (PLS) - Discriminant Analysis (DA) 
using the nonlinear iterative partial least squares (NIPALS) method 
implemented in JMP® Pro 18 software will be implemented to test how 
well the graph measures are able to distinguish ME/CFS patients from 
healthy participants. Furthermore, functional connectivity Multivariate 
Pattern Analysis (fc-MVPA) will be performed (Nieto-Castanon, 2022b). 
Voxel-level results will be determined using multivariate parametric 
statistics with random-effects across subjects and sample covariance 
estimation across measurements. Cluster-level inferences (groups of 
adjacent voxels) will be derived from nonparametric statistics using 
Threshold 
Free 
Cluster 
Enhancement 
(TFCE), 
with 
5000 
residual-randomization iterations. Results will be familywise error cor­
rected (pFWE < 0.05). More details in Supplement.
2.7.1.5. Brain PET. Case-control comparisons for ROI data will be 
performed using MANOVA with (positive) FDR correction (< 0.05). In 
addition, PLS-DA will be used to test how well the ME/CFS patients can 
be distinguished from healthy participants based on PET outcomes (VT 
and K1). To account for differences in genotypes in the PET analyses, we 
will use the residuals, after regressing the dependent variables on 
binding-affinity (high or medium affinity binding), in the analyses.
2.7.1.6. Brain MRS. Group differences for MI and CHO concentrations 
in the ACC will be analyzed using a one-way MANOVA with qFDR 
correction (< 0.05). Other metabolites (tNAA, Glx) will be evaluated 
exploratorily.
2.7.2. Objective 2: test the interactions between the 
neuropsychophysiological mechanisms in ME/CFS
For objective 2, structural equation modeling (SEM) will be used to 
investigate the hypothesized relationships among the SRS, immune 
functioning, gut-microbiome, SCFAs, and brain-related outcomes in the 
patient sample. A path diagram illustrating the hypothesized model is 
shown in Fig. 7. Model identification and fit will be checked to ensure 
that all parameters can be uniquely estimated from the available data. 
To assess the indirect effects, 5000 bootstrap samples will be used, 
providing robust estimates of the confidence intervals for the indirect 
effects.
For research question 2 (see Table 1), each set of input variables will 
be examined for associations with fatigue and fatigability outcomes 
using multiple regressions. Voxel-wise neural and neurochemical mea­
sures will additionally be assessed using least absolute shrinkage and 
selection operator principal component regression (LASSO-PCR). 
Because we expect substantial intercorrelations among the input vari­
ables, we will also use partial least squares (PLS) regression to assess 
how combinations of these measures collectively relate to fatigue and 
fatigability.
Furthermore, we will test whether brain functioning mediates the 
associations between the input variables and fatigue/fatigability using 
multivariate mediation analyses using the PDM method.
2.7.3. Objective 3: to identify subgroups of ME/CFS patients based on inter- 
individual differences
We will test the hypothesis that data-driven multimodal ME/CFS 
subtypes can be identified based on a combination of mechanisms. 
Unsupervised clustering algorithms, like Gaussian mixture models, and 
co-clustering methods (Tokuda et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019) will be 
applied on data from all neuropsychophysiological levels.
2.7.4. Objective 4: use these subgroups as potential predictors of 
longitudinal effects throughout treatment
For objective 4, linear mixed models will be used to analyze the 
evolution of outcome variables such as symptom severity, fatigability, 
quality of life and activity levels (self-reported, lab-based, and ESM- 
based) in order to examine treatment response. In addition, latent 
class growth analysis (LCGA) will be used to assess individual differ­
ences in treatment responses by identifying subgroups based on treat­
ment response trajectories. LCGA clusters participants based on both the 
Fig. 7. Path model visualizing the hypothesized neuropsychophysiological relationships in the ME/CFS patient sample. SCFAs = short-chain fatty acids, HPA- 
axis = hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, ANS = autonomic nervous system, fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging, rsFC = resting-state functional 
connectivity.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
12 

baseline level of functioning (intercept) and its trajectory over time 
(slope, linear and higher-order depending on model fit). Fit statistics, 
such as the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and entropy, will be 
applied to decide the number of subgroups resulting from the LCGA. 
Given our sample size, we will not choose a LCGA solution in which one 
of the clusters contains less than 10% of the sample. Additionally, by 
adding subgroup membership as categorical predictors to the linear 
mixed models and LCGAs we will test whether the subgroups defined in 
objective 3 are predictors of treatment trajectories. Further, multiple 
regressions, LASSO-PCR, and PLS will be used in a similar way as 
objective 2.2 to determine mechanisms underlying treatment response.
Ethics approval
We will conduct the trial in compliance with the principles of the 
Declaration of Helsinki (version, 2013), and in accordance with all 
applicable regulatory requirements. This protocol and related docu­
ments were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee Research 
UZ/KU Leuven (Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven), ref. S66452 in September 
2022. Signed informed consent form (ICF) for all participants will be 
applied prior to their enrollment and participation in the study. Privacy 
rights of human subjects have been acknowledged.
Funding information
This study was funded by a research project from the Research 
Foundation - Flanders (FWO, G057921N) to LVO, KB. MVDH is a senior 
postdoctoral research fellow of the FWO (12A7U26N). LVO is a research 
professor of the KU Leuven Special Research Fund. LQ is funded by 
China Scholarship Council (CSC, 202306750011). Funding sources had 
no involvement in study collection, analysis and interpretation of data, 
writing of the report and submission for publication.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ynse Dooms: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Meth­
odology, Project administration, Visualization, Writing – original draft. 
Lixin Qiu: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, 
Writing – original draft. Iris Coppieters: Investigation, Methodology, 
Writing – review & editing. Elfi Vergaelen: Conceptualization, Re­
sources, Writing – review & editing. Stephan Claes: Conceptualization, 
Resources, Writing – review & editing. Patrick Dupont: Formal anal­
ysis, Writing – review & editing. Melina Hehl: Formal analysis, Writing 
– review & editing. Koen Cuypers: Formal analysis, Writing – review & 
editing. Harald Engler: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. 
Kirsten Dombrowski: Formal analysis. Kristin Verbeke: Formal 
analysis, Writing – review & editing. Omer Van den Bergh: Concep­
tualization, Writing – review & editing. Jeroen Raes: Formal analysis, 
Writing – review & editing. Lukas Van Oudenhove: Conceptualization, 
Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Re­
sources, Writing – review & editing. Maaike Van Den Houte: 
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, 
Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. 
Katleen Bogaerts: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodol­
ogy, Resources, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Greet Vandermeulen, Sophie Wieczorek, 
Marta Walentynowicz and Master students Julie Stegen, Silvana Sokolji, 
Ditte Coopmans, Emily Van der Schueren, Bente Ponsaerts, Karim Tahri, 
and Caressa Haerts.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bbih.2026.101299.
Data availability
The code supporting this work is available in open Github re­
positories. The in-house scripts used for the PET preprocessing and VT 
and K1 calculations can be downloaded from the public repository 
https://github.com/labgas/LaBGAScore/tree/main/pet/scripts.
The custom scripts to calculate first-level contrasts during the MIST 
can be downloaded from https://github.com/labgas/LaBGAScore/ 
tree/main/firstlevel. Scripts on the second-level fixed effects analysis 
can be found at https://github.com/labgas/CANlab_help_examples.
Mediation analyses will be conducted with the use of https://github. 
com/canlab/MediationToolbox.
The ethics protocol and datasets that will be generated and/or 
analyzed during the current study will be available from the corre­
sponding author upon reasonable request.
References
Achterhof, R., Kirtley, O.J., Schneider, M., et al., 2022. General psychopathology and its 
social correlates in the daily lives of youth. J. Affect. Disord. 309, 428–436. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.04.147.
Adamson, J., Ali, S., Santhouse, A., Wessely, S., Chalder, T., 2020. Cognitive behavioural 
therapy for chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome: outcomes from a specialist 
clinic in the UK. J. R. Soc. Med. 113 (10), 394–402. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0141076820951545.
Albrecht, D.S., Forsberg, A., Sandstr¨om, A., et al., 2019a. Brain glial activation in 
fibromyalgia - a multi-site positron emission tomography investigation. Brain Behav. 
Immun. 75, 72–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2018.09.018.
Albrecht, D.S., Kim, M., Akeju, O., et al., 2021. The neuroinflammatory component of 
negative affect in patients with chronic pain. Mol. Psychiatr. 26 (3), 864–874. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-019-0433-1.
Albrecht, D.S., Mainero, C., Ichijo, E., et al., 2019b. Imaging of neuroinflammation in 
migraine with aura: a [(11)C]PBR28 PET/MRI study. Neurology 92 (17), 
e2038–e2050. https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.0000000000007371.
Almutairi, B., Langley, C., Crawley, E., Thai, N.J., 2020. Using structural and functional 
MRI as a neuroimaging technique to investigate chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalopathy: a systematic review. BMJ Open 10 (8), e031672. https://doi.org/ 
10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031672.
Amekran, Y., Damoun, N., El Hangouche, A.J., 2025. A focus on the assessment of the 
autonomic function using heart rate variability. Glob. Cardiol. Sci. Pract. 2025 (1), 
e202512. https://doi.org/10.21542/gcsp.2025.12.
Andersen, J.V., Markussen, K.H., Jakobsen, E., Schousboe, A., Waagepetersen, H.S., 
Rosenberg, P.A., et al., 2021. Glutamate metabolism and recycling at the excitatory 
synapse in health and neurodegeneration. Neuropharmacology 196, 108719. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2021.108719.
Annesley, S.J., Missailidis, D., Heng, B., Josev, E.K., Armstrong, C.W., 2024. Unravelling 
shared mechanisms: insights from recent ME/CFS research to illuminate long COVID 
pathologies. Trends Mol. Med. 30 (5), 443–458. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
molmed.2024.02.003.
Arron, H.E., Marsh, B.D., Kell, D.B., Khan, M.A., Jaeger, B.R., Pretorius, E., 2024. Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: the biology of a neglected disease. 
Front. Immunol. 15, 1386607. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1386607.
Bansal, A.S., Seton, K.A., Brooks, J.C.W., Carding, S.R., 2025. Cognitive dysfunction in 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome—aetiology and potential 
treatments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 26 (5), 1896. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms26051896.
Baraniuk, J.N., Eaton-Fitch, N., Marshall-Gradisnik, S., 2024. Meta-analysis of natural 
killer cell cytotoxicity in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Front. Immunol. 15, 1440643. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1440643.
Barge-Schaapveld, D.Q., Nicolson, N.A., Berkhof, J., deVries, M.W., 1999. Quality of life 
in depression: daily life determinants and variability. Psychiatry Res. 88 (3), 
173–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-1781(99)00081-5.
Beckers, L., Ory, D., Geric, I., et al., 2018. Increased expression of translocator protein 
(TSPO) marks pro-inflammatory microglia but does not predict neurodegeneration. 
Mol. Imag. Biol. 20 (1), 94–102. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11307-017-1099-1.
Benjamini, Y., Hochberg, Y., 1995. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and 
powerful approach to multiple testing. J. Royal Statist. Soc. Serie. b-methodol. 57, 
289–300. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x.
Bernstein, D.P., Fink, L., Handelsman, L., et al., 1994. Initial reliability and validity of a 
new retrospective measure of child abuse and neglect. Am. J. Psychiatry 151 (8), 
1132–1136. https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.151.8.1132.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
13 

Berretz, G., Packheiser, J., Kumsta, R., Wolf, O.T., Ocklenburg, S., 2021. The brain under 
stress-A systematic review and activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of 
changes in BOLD signal associated with acute stress exposure. Neurosci. Biobehav. 
Rev. 124, 89–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.01.001.
Blundell, S., Ray, K.K., Buckland, M., White, P.D., 2015. Chronic fatigue syndrome and 
circulating cytokines: a systematic review. Brain Behav. Immun. 50, 186–195. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2015.07.004.
Bogaerts, K., Van Den Houte, M., Jongen, D., et al., 2023. Brain mediators of negative 
affect-induced physical symptom reporting in patients with functional somatic 
syndromes. Transl. Psychiatry 13 (1), 285. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-023- 
02567-3.
Boissoneault, J., Letzen, J., Lai, S., et al., 2016. Abnormal resting state functional 
connectivity in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: an arterial spin-labeling 
fMRI study. Magn. Reson. Imaging 34 (4), 603–608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mri.2015.12.008.
Boissoneault, J., Letzen, J., Lai, S., Robinson, M.E., Staud, R., 2018. Static and dynamic 
functional connectivity in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: use of arterial 
spin labelling fMRI. Clin. Physiol. Funct. Imag. 38 (1), 128–137. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/cpf.12393.
Buysse, D.J., Reynolds 3rd, C.F., Monk, T.H., Berman, S.R., Kupfer, D.J., 1989. The 
Pittsburgh sleep quality index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and 
research. Psychiatry Res. 28 (2), 193–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1781(89) 
90047-4.
Cakmak, J.D., Liu, L., Poirier, S.E., et al., 2022. The functional and structural associations 
of aberrant microglial activity in major depressive disorder. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 
47 (3), E197–e208. https://doi.org/10.1503/jpn.210124.
Chaney, A.M., Deal, E.M., Jackson, I.M., James, M.L., 2021. PET imaging of 
neuroinflammation. Mol. Imaging 1335–1371. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12- 
816386-3.00047-8.
Chang, L., Munsaka, S.M., Kraft-Terry, S., Ernst, T., 2013. Magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy to assess neuroinflammation and neuropathic pain. J. Neuroimmune 
Pharmacol. 8 (3), 576–593. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11481-013-9460-x.
Chen, J., Li, Y., Tian, Y., et al., 2015. Interaction between microbes and host intestinal 
health: modulation by dietary nutrients and gut-brain-endocrine-immune axis. Curr. 
Protein Pept. Sci. 16 (7), 592–603. https://doi.org/10.2174/ 
1389203716666150630135720.
Clark, J.B., 1998. N-acetyl aspartate: a marker for neuronal loss or mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Dev. Neurosci. 20 (4–5), 271–276. https://doi.org/10.1159/ 
000017321.
Clarke W, Berrington A, Jbabdi S. FSL-MRS pipelines and fitting visualisation. https: 
//pages.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fsl_mrs_practicals/marbel_meeting/6_fitting_vis_pipel 
ines.html (accessed 13 January 2026).
Clarke, W.B.A., Jbabdi, S., 2025. Introduction to Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 
Acquisition and Analysis. Oxford Neuroimaging Primers, p. 208.
Cohen, S., 1988. Perceived stress in a probability sample of the United States. In: 
Spacapan, S., Oskamp, S. (Eds.), The Social Psychology of Health. Sage.
Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue S, 
Board on the Health of Select P, Institute of M. the National Academies Collection: 
Reports Funded by National Institutes of Health. Beyond Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness, 2015. National 
Academies Press (US) Copyright 2015 by the National Academy of Sciences. All 
rights reserved.
Cook, D.B., O'Connor, P.J., Lange, G., Steffener, J., 2007. Functional neuroimaging 
correlates of mental fatigue induced by cognition among chronic fatigue syndrome 
patients and controls. Neuroimage 36 (1), 108–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuroimage.2007.02.033.
Corbitt, M., Eaton-Fitch, N., Staines, D., Cabanas, H., Marshall-Gradisnik, S., 2019. 
A systematic review of cytokines in chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/systemic exertion intolerance disease (ME/CFS/SEID). BMC 
Neurol. 19 (1), 207. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-019-1433-0.
Cui, Z., Gong, G., 2018. The effect of machine learning regression algorithms and sample 
size on individualized behavioral prediction with functional connectivity features. 
Neuroimage 178, 622–637. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.06.001.
Dalile, B., Van Oudenhove, L., Vervliet, B., Verbeke, K., 2019. The role of short-chain 
fatty acids in microbiota-gut-brain communication. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 16 (8), 461–478. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-019-0157-3.
Dalmaijer, E.S., Nord, C.L., Astle, D.E., 2022. Statistical power for cluster analysis. BMC 
Bioinf. 23 (1), 205. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-022-04675-1.
De Picker, L.J., Morrens, M., Branchi, I., et al., 2023. TSPO PET brain inflammation 
imaging: a transdiagnostic systematic review and meta-analysis of 156 case-control 
studies. Brain Behav. Immun. 113, 415–431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbi.2023.07.023.
Dedovic, K., Renwick, R., Mahani, N.K., Engert, V., Lupien, S.J., Pruessner, J.C., 2005. 
The Montreal imaging stress task: using functional imaging to investigate the effects 
of perceiving and processing psychosocial stress in the human brain. J. Psychiatry 
Neurosci. 30 (5), 319–325. https://doi.org/10.1139/jpn.0541.
Domingo, J.C., Cordobilla, B., Ferrer, R., Giralt, M., Alegre-Martín, J., Castro-Marrero, J., 
2021. Are circulating fibroblast growth factor 21 and N-Terminal prohormone of 
brain natriuretic peptide promising novel biomarkers in myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
chronic fatigue syndrome? Antioxid. Redox Signaling 34 (18), 1420–1427. https:// 
doi.org/10.1089/ars.2020.8230.
Drossman, D.A., Hasler, W.L., 2016. Rome IV-Functional GI disorders: disorders of gut- 
brain interaction. Gastroenterology 150 (6), 1257–1261. https://doi.org/10.1053/j. 
gastro.2016.03.035.
Dudova, D., Bozhkova, M., Petrov, S., Nikolova, R., Kalfova, T., Ivanovska, M., et al., 
2026. Insights into the complex biological network underlying myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 27 (1), 268. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijms27010268.
Esteban, O., Markiewicz, C.J., Blair, R.W., et al., 2019. fMRIPrep: a robust preprocessing 
pipeline for functional MRI. Nat. Methods 16 (1), 111–116. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41592-018-0235-4.
Esteban, Oscar, Blair, Ross, Markiewicz, Christopher J., Berleant, Shoshana L., 
Craig, Moodie, Ma, Feilong, Isik, Ayse Ilkay, et al., 2018. FMRIPrep (Version 20.2.6). 
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.852659 [software]. 
Filippi, M., Kr¨ahenmann, R., Fissler, P., 2022. The link between energy-related sensations 
and metabolism: implications for treating fatigue. Front. Psychol. 13. https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.920556, 2022. 
Fraser, M.I.E., Adamski, D., Ciarrochi, J., Gloster, A.T., Sahdra, B., 2025. Self- 
compassion, other-compassion, and subjective sleep quality indicators in a clinical 
population: an experience sampling study. Mindfulness 16 (10), 2916–2929. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s12671-025-02647-z.
Frost, R.O., Marten, P., Lahart, C., Rosenblate, R., 1990. The dimensions of 
perfectionism. Cognit. Ther. Res. 14, 449–468. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF01172967.
Fukuda, K., Straus, S.E., Hickie, I., Sharpe, M.C., Dobbins, J.G., Komaroff, A., 1994. The 
chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive approach to its definition and study. 
International Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Study Group Ann. Intern. Med. 121 (12), 
953–959. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-121-12-199412150-00009.
Geuter, S., Reynolds Losin, E.A., Roy, M., et al., 2020. Multiple brain networks mediating 
stimulus-pain relationships in humans. Cerebr. Cortex 30 (7), 4204–4219. https:// 
doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhaa048.
Ghali, A., Lacout, C., Fortrat, J.O., Depres, K., Ghali, M., Lavigne, C., 2022. Factors 
influencing the prognosis of patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome. Diagnostics (Basel) 12 (10). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
diagnostics12102540.
Giloteaux, L., Li, J., Hornig, M., Lipkin, W.I., Ruppert, D., Hanson, M.R., 2023. 
Proteomics and cytokine analyses distinguish myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome cases from controls. J. Transl. Med. 21 (1), 322.
Giloteaux, L., O'Neal, A., Castro-Marrero, J., Levine, S.M., Hanson, M.R., 2020. Cytokine 
profiling of extracellular vesicles isolated from plasma in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a pilot study. J. Transl. Med. 18 (1), 
387. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-020-02560-0.
Godlewska, B.R., Williams, S., Emir, U.E., et al., 2022. Neurochemical abnormalities in 
chronic fatigue syndrome: a pilot magnetic resonance spectroscopy study at 7 tesla. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 239 (1), 163–171. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213- 
021-05986-6.
Groven, N., Fors, E.A., Reitan, S.K., 2019. Patients with fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue 
syndrome show increased hsCRP compared to healthy controls. Brain Behav. Immun. 
81, 172–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2019.06.010.
Hadjikhani, N., Albrecht, D.S., Mainero, C., et al., 2020. Extra-axial inflammatory signal 
in parameninges in migraine with visual aura. Ann. Neurol. 87 (6), 939–949. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25731.
Hannestad, J., DellaGioia, N., Gallezot, J.D., et al., 2013. The neuroinflammation marker 
translocator protein is not elevated in individuals with mild-to-moderate depression: 
a [11C]PBR28 PET study. Brain Behav. Immun. 33, 131–138. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbi.2013.06.010.
Hebart, M.N., G¨orgen, K., Haynes, J.D., 2014. The decoding toolbox (TDT): a versatile 
software package for multivariate analyses of functional imaging data. Front. 
Neuroinf. 8, 88. https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00088.
Heininga, V.E., Dejonckheere, E., Houben, M., et al., 2019. The dynamical signature of 
anhedonia in major depressive disorder: positive emotion dynamics, reactivity, and 
recovery. BMC Psychiatry 19 (1), 59. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-018-1983-5.
Heng, B., Gunasegaran, B., Krishnamurthy, S., Bustamante, S., Pires, A.S., Chow, S., 
et al., 2025. Mapping the complexity of ME/CFS: evidence for abnormal energy 
metabolism, altered immune profile, and vascular dysfunction. Cell Rep. Med. 6 
(12), 102514. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102514.
Hodes, R.L., Cook 3rd, E.W., Lang, P.J., 1985. Individual differences in autonomic 
response: conditioned association or conditioned fear? Psychophysiology 22 (5), 
545–560. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1985.tb01649.x.
Holmes, S.E., Hinz, R., Conen, S., et al., 2018. Elevated translocator protein in anterior 
cingulate in major depression and a role for inflammation in suicidal thinking: a 
positron emission tomography study. Biol. Psychiatry 83 (1), 61–69. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.08.005.
Hornig, M., Montoya, J.G., Klimas, N.G., Levine, S., Felsenstein, D., Bateman, L., et al., 
2015. Distinct plasma immune signatures in ME/CFS are present early in the course 
of illness. Sci. Adv. 1 (1). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1400121.
Iu, D.S., Maya, J., Vu, L.T., Fogarty, E.A., McNairn, A.J., Ahmed, F., et al., 2024. 
Transcriptional reprogramming primes CD8+ T cells toward exhaustion in Myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 121 (50), 
e2415119121. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2415119121.
Jeon, S.Y., Seo, S., Lee, J.S., et al., 2017. [11C]-(R)-PK11195 positron emission 
tomography in patients with complex regional pain syndrome: a pilot study. 
Medicine (Baltim.) 96 (1), e5735. https://doi.org/10.1097/md.0000000000005735.
Jonsj¨o, M.A., Olsson, G.L., Wicksell, R.K., Alving, K., Holmstr¨om, L., Andreasson, A., 
2020. The role of low-grade inflammation in ME/CFS (Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/ 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome) - associations with symptoms. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 113, 104578. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
psyneuen.2019.104578.
Joo, Y.H., Lee, M.W., Son, Y.D., et al., 2021. In vivo cerebral translocator protein (TSPO) 
binding and its relationship with blood adiponectin levels in treatment-naïve young 
adults with major depression: a [(11)C]PK11195 PET study. Biomedicines 10 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10010034.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
14 

Kaufmann, T., Sütterlin, S., Schulz, S.M., V¨ogele, C., 2011. ARTiiFACT: a tool for heart 
rate artifact processing and heart rate variability analysis. Behav. Res. Methods 43 
(4), 1161–1170. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0107-7.
Kavyani, B., Ahn, S.B., Missailidis, D., Annesley, S.J., Fisher, P.R., Schloeffel, R., et al., 
2024. Dysregulation of the Kynurenine pathway, cytokine expression pattern, and 
proteomics profile link to symptomology in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Mol. Neurobiol. 61 (7), 3771–3787. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12035-023-03784-z.
Kazakou, P., Nicolaides, N.C., Chrousos, G.P., 2023. Basic concepts and hormonal 
regulators of the stress system. Horm. Res. Paediatr. 96 (1), 8–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1159/000526335.
Keech, A., Sandler, C.X., Vollmer-Conna, U., Cvejic, E., Lloyd, A.R., Barry, B.K., 2015. 
Capturing the post-exertional exacerbation of fatigue following physical and 
cognitive challenge in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Psychosom. Res. 79 
(6), 537–549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2015.08.008.
Kim, B.H., Namkoong, K., Kim, J.J., et al., 2015. Altered resting-state functional 
connectivity in women with chronic fatigue syndrome. Psychiatry Res. 234 (3), 
292–297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015.10.014.
Klippel, A., Schick, A., Myin-Germeys, I., Rauschenberg, C., Vaessen, T., Reininghaus, U., 
2022. Modelling the temporal interplay between stress and affective disturbances in 
pathways to psychosis: an experience sampling study. Psychol. Med. 52 (13), 
2776–2785. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291720004894.
Kogler, L., Müller, V.I., Chang, A., et al., 2015. Psychosocial versus physiological stress - 
meta-analyses on deactivations and activations of the neural correlates of stress 
reactions. Neuroimage 119, 235–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuroimage.2015.06.059.
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R.L., Williams, J.B., 2001. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression 
severity measure. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 16 (9), 606–613. https://doi.org/10.1046/ 
j.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x.
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R.L., Williams, J.B., 2002. The PHQ-15: validity of a new measure 
for evaluating the severity of somatic symptoms. Psychosom. Med. 64 (2), 258–266. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/00006842-200203000-00008.
Kruschwitz, J.D., List, D., Waller, L., Rubinov, M., Walter, H., 2015. GraphVar: a user- 
friendly toolbox for comprehensive graph analyses of functional brain connectivity. 
J. Neurosci. Methods 245, 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jneumeth.2015.02.021.
Kuut, T.A., Buffart, L.M., Braamse, A.M.J., et al., 2024. Does the effect of cognitive 
behavior therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) vary by patient 
characteristics? A systematic review and individual patient data meta-analysis. 
Psychol. Med. 54 (3), 447–456. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291723003148.
Lang, P., 1980. Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: computer 
applications. Technology in Mental Health Care Delivery Systems, pp. 119–137. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.1993.tb03352.x.
Leslie, K., Clague-Baker, N., Hilliard, N., Bull, M., 2023. A Physiotherapist's Guide to 
Understanding and Managing ME/CFS. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Lewis, S.J., Heaton, K.W., 1997. Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit 
time. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 32 (9), 920–924. https://doi.org/10.3109/ 
00365529709011203.
Li, H., Sagar, A.P., K´eri, S., 2018. Microglial markers in the frontal cortex are related to 
cognitive dysfunctions in major depressive disorder. J. Affect. Disord. 241, 305–310. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2018.08.021.
Li, Y., Wu, K., Hu, X., et al., 2022. Altered effective connectivity of resting-state networks 
by Tai chi chuan in chronic fatigue syndrome patients: a multivariate granger 
causality study. Front. Neurol. 13, 858833. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fneur.2022.858833.
Loggia, M.L., Chonde, D.B., Akeju, O., et al., 2015. Evidence for brain glial activation in 
chronic pain patients. Brain 138 (Pt 3), 604–615. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/ 
awu377.
Maccioni, L., Michelle, C.M., Brusaferri, L., et al., 2024. A blood-free modeling approach 
for the quantification of the blood-to-brain tracer exchange in TSPO PET imaging. 
Front. Neurosci. 18, 1395769. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2024.1395769.
Maes, I., Mertens, L., Poppe, L., Crombez, G., Vetrovsky, T., Van Dyck, D., 2022. The 
variability of emotions, physical complaints, intention, and self-efficacy: an 
ecological momentary assessment study in older adults. PeerJ 10, e13234. https:// 
doi.org/10.7717/peerj.13234.
Maksoud, R., du Preez, S., Eaton-Fitch, N., et al., 2020. A systematic review of 
neurological impairments in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
using neuroimaging techniques. PLoS One 15 (4), e0232475. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0232475.
Maksoud, R., Magawa, C., Eaton-Fitch, N., Thapaliya, K., Marshall-Gradisnik, S., 2023. 
Biomarkers for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): a 
systematic review. BMC Med. 21 (1), 189. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-023- 
02893-9.
Manca, R., Khan, K., Mitolo, M., De Marco, M., Grieveson, L., Varley, R., et al., 2021. 
Modulatory effects of cognitive exertion on regional functional connectivity of the 
salience network in women with ME/CFS: a pilot study. J. Neurol. Sci. 422, 117326. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2021.117326.
Martinez-Lavin, M., 2012. Fibromyalgia: when distress becomes (Un)sympathetic pain. 
Pain Res Treat. 2012, 981565. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/981565.
Martínez-Martínez, L.A., Mora, T., Vargas, A., Fuentes-Iniestra, M., Martínez-Lavín, M., 
2014. Sympathetic nervous system dysfunction in fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue 
syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, and interstitial cystitis: a review of case-control 
studies. J. Clin. Rheumatol. 20 (3), 146–150. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
rhu.0000000000000089.
Matcham, F., Barattieri di San Pietro, C., Bulgari, V., et al., 2019. Remote assessment of 
disease and relapse in major depressive disorder (RADAR-MDD): a multi-centre 
prospective cohort study protocol. BMC Psychiatry 19 (1), 72. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12888-019-2049-z.
Matsudaira, T., Terada, T., Obi, T., Yokokura, M., Takahashi, Y., Ouchi, Y., 2020. 
Coexistence of cerebral hypometabolism and neuroinflammation in the thalamo- 
limbic-brainstem region in young women with functional somatic syndrome. 
EJNMMI Res. 10 (1), 29. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13550-020-00617-1.
May, M., Milrad, S.F., Perdomo, D.M., Czaja, S.J., Fletcher, M.A., Jutagir, D.R., et al., 
2020. Post-exertional malaise is associated with greater symptom burden and 
psychological distress in patients diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome. 
J. Psychosom. Res. 129, 109893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpsychores.2019.109893.
Maya, J., 2023. Surveying the metabolic and dysfunctional profiles of T cells and NK cells 
in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (15). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241511937.
McManimen, S.L., Sunnquist, M.L., Jason, L.A., 2019. Deconstructing post-exertional 
malaise: an exploratory factor analysis. J. Health Psychol. 24 (2), 188–198. https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/1359105316664139.
Millett, C.E., Burdick, K.E., Kubicki, M.R., 2022. The effects of peripheral inflammation 
on the Brain-A neuroimaging perspective. Harv. Rev. Psychiatr. 30 (1), 54–58. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/hrp.0000000000000323.
Milovanovic, B., Markovic, N., Petrovic, M., Zugic, V., Ostojic, M., Rankovic-Nicic, L., 
et al., 2025. Assessment of autonomic nervous system function in patients with 
chronic fatigue syndrome and Post-COVID-19 syndrome presenting with recurrent 
syncope. J. Clin. Med. 14 (3), 811. https://doi.org/10.3390/biom5043112.
Minarini, G., 2020. Root mean square of the successive differences as marker of the 
parasympathetic system and difference in the outcome after ANS stimulation. 
Autonomic Nervous System Monitoring - Heart Rate Variability. IntechOpen, 
London. 
Montoya, J.G., Holmes, T.H., Anderson, J.N., et al., 2017. Cytokine signature associated 
with disease severity in chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. 
S. A. 114 (34), E7150–e7158. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1710519114.
Mothersill, O., Donohoe, G., 2016. Neural effects of social environmental stress - an 
activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Psychol. Med. 46 (10), 2015–2023. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291716000477.
Mueller, B., Figueroa, A., Robinson-Papp, J., 2022. Structural and functional connections 
between the autonomic nervous system, hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, and 
the immune system: a context and time dependent stress response network. Neurol. 
Sci. 43 (2), 951–960. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-021-05810-1.
Mueller, C., Fang, Y.D., Jones, C., et al., 2023. Evidence of neuroinflammation in 
fibromyalgia syndrome: a [ 18 F]DPA-714 positron emission tomography study. Pain 
164 (10), 2285–2295. https://doi.org/10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002927.
Mueller, C., Lin, J.C., Sheriff, S., Maudsley, A.A., Younger, J.W., 2020. Evidence of 
widespread metabolite abnormalities in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: assessment with whole-brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Brain 
Imaging Behav. 14 (2), 562–572. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-018-0029-4.
Myin-Germeys, I., Kasanova, Z., Vaessen, T., Vachon, H., Kirtley, O., Viechtbauer, W., 
et al., 2018. Experience sampling methodology in mental health research: new 
insights and technical developments. World Psychiatry 17 (2), 123–132. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/wps.20513.
Myin-Germeys, I., Kuppens, P., 2026. The open handbook of experience sampling 
methodology: a step-by-step guide to designing. Conducting, and Analyzing ESM 
Studies, third ed. Leuven University Press.
Nacul, L., O'Boyle, S., Palla, L., et al., 2020. How myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) progresses: the natural history of ME/CFS. Front. 
Neurol. 11, 826. https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2020.00826.
Nakatomi, Y., Mizuno, K., Ishii, A., et al., 2014. Neuroinflammation in patients with 
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: an (1)(1)C-(R)-PK11195 PET 
study. J. Nucl. Med. 55 (6), 945–950. https://doi.org/10.2967/jnumed.113.131045.
Nap-van der Vlist, M.M., Houtveen, J., Dalmeijer, G.W., et al., 2021. Internet and 
smartphone-based ecological momentary assessment and personalized advice 
(PROfeel) in adolescents with chronic conditions: a feasibility study. Internet 
Interventions 25, 100395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2021.100395.
National Guideline Centre. NICE Evidence Reviews Collection, 2021. Multidisciplinary 
Care: Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (Or Encephalopathy)/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: 
Diagnosis and Management. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) Copyright © NICE, London. 
National Guideline Centre (UK), 2021. Pharmacological Interventions. Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis (Or Encephalopathy)/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Diagnosis and 
Management. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) Copyright © 
NICE, London. 
Nelson, M.J., Bahl, J.S., Buckley, J.D., Thomson, R.L., Davison, K., 2019. Evidence of 
altered cardiac autonomic regulation in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine 98 (43), e17600. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/md.0000000000017600.
Nieto-Castanon, A., 2022b. Brain-wide connectome inferences using functional 
connectivity MultiVariate pattern analyses (fc-MVPA). PLoS Comput. Biol. 18 (11), 
e1010634. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010634.
Nieto-Castanon, A.W.-G.S., 2022a. CONN Functional Connectivity Toolbox: RRID:SCR_ 
009550, p. 63. Version 22 Hilbert Press Manual/Technical Report Library. 
Nijenhuis, E.R.S., Van der Hart, O., Vanderlinden, J., 1999. Traumatic experiences 
checklist. In: Nijenhuis, E. (Ed.), Somatoform Dissociation: Phenomena, 
Measurement, and Theoretical Issues. Van Gorcum.
Oeltzschner, G., Z¨ollner, H.J., Hui, S.C.N., et al., 2020. Osprey: open-source processing, 
reconstruction & estimation of magnetic resonance spectroscopy data. J. Neurosci. 
Methods 343, 108827. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2020.108827.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
15 

Overbeek, T., Schruers, K., 2019. MINI-S Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview- 
Simplified, Dutch Version 1.1 (DSM-5). University of Maastricht.
Penny WF, K.J., Ashburner, J., Kiebel, S., Nichols, T.E., 2011. Statistical Parametric 
Mapping: the Analysis of Functional Brain Images. Elsevier.
Petrov, S., Bozhkova, M., Ivanovska, M., Kalfova, T., Dudova, D., Nikolova, R., et al., 
2025. Comparable immune alterations and inflammatory signatures in ME/CFS and 
long COVID. Biomedicines 13 (12). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
biomedicines13123001.
Qiu, Y., Fan, Z., Zhong, M., et al., 2022. Brain activation elicited by acute stress: an ALE 
meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 132, 706–724. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neubiorev.2021.11.020.
Raijmakers, R., Roerink, M., Keijmel, S., et al., 2022. No signs of neuroinflammation in 
women with chronic fatigue syndrome or Q fever fatigue syndrome using the TSPO 
ligand [(11)C]-PK11195. Neurol. Neuroimmunol. Neuroinflamm. 9 (1). https://doi. 
org/10.1212/nxi.0000000000001113.
Ramadan, D.J., Kichula, K.M., Tao, S., Porfilio, T., Lande, A., Fluge, Ø., et al., 2025. Killer 
cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) alleles suggested to be associated with 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Brain Behav. 
Immun. 130, 106098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2025.106098.
Ramakers, I., Fonteyne, R., Walentynowicz, M., Oudenhove, L.V., Houte, M.V.D., 
Bogaerts, K., 2025. The Need for Controllability and Predictability questionnaire 
(NCP-q): psychometric properties and preliminary findings in a clinical sample. 
Health Psychol. Rep. 13 (2), 201–214. https://doi.org/10.5114/hpr/195733.
Rathore, K., Shukla, N., Naik, S., Sambhav, K., Dange, K., Bhuyan, D., et al., 2025. The 
bidirectional relationship between the gut microbiome and mental health: a 
comprehensive review. Cureus 17 (3), e80810. https://doi.org/10.7759/ 
cureus.80810.
Richards, E.M., Zanotti-Fregonara, P., Fujita, M., et al., 2018. PET radioligand binding to 
translocator protein (TSPO) is increased in unmedicated depressed subjects. 
EJNMMI Res. 8 (1), 57. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13550-018-0401-9.
Rivas, J.L., Palencia, T., Fern´andez, G., García, M., 2018. Association of T and NK cell 
phenotype with the diagnosis of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS). Front. Immunol. 9, 1028. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fimmu.2018.01028.
Rorden, C., 2025. MRIcroGL: voxel-based visualization for neuroimaging. Nat. Methods 
22 (8), 1613–1614. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02763-7.
Sanal-Hayes, N.E.M., McLaughlin, M., Hayes, L.D., Mair, J.L., Ormerod, J., Carless, D., 
et al., 2023. A scoping review of 'Pacing' for management of Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): lessons learned for the 
long COVID pandemic. J. Transl. Med. 21 (1), 720. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967- 
023-04587-5.
Sasso, E.M., Er, T.S., Eaton-Fitch, N., Hool, L., Muraki, K., Marshall-Gradisnik, S., 2025. 
Large-scale investigation confirms TRPM3 ion channel dysfunction in Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Front Med (Lausanne) 12, 1703924. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2025.1703924.
Schroyen, G., Blommaert, J., van Weehaeghe, D., et al., 2021. Neuroinflammation and its 
association with cognition, neuronal markers and peripheral inflammation after 
chemotherapy for breast cancer. Cancers (Basel) 13 (16). https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cancers13164198.
Setiawan, E., Attwells, S., Wilson, A.A., et al., 2018. Association of translocator protein 
total distribution volume with duration of untreated major depressive disorder: a 
cross-sectional study. Lancet Psychiatry 5 (4), 339–347. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
s2215-0366(18)30048-8.
Setiawan, E., Wilson, A.A., Mizrahi, R., et al., 2015. Role of translocator protein density, 
a marker of neuroinflammation, in the brain during major depressive episodes. 
JAMA Psychiatry 72 (3), 268–275. https://doi.org/10.1001/ 
jamapsychiatry.2014.2427.
Seton, K.A., Espejo-Oltra, J.A., Gim´enez-Orenga, K., Haagmans, R., Ramadan, D.J., 
Mehlsen, J., 2024. Advancing research and treatment: an overview of clinical trials 
in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and future 
perspectives. J. Clin. Med. 13 (2), 325. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13020325.
Shaffer, F., Ginsberg, J.P., 2017. An overview of heart rate variability metrics and norms. 
Front. Public Health 5, 258. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2017.00258.
Shan, Z.Y., Barnden, L.R., Kwiatek, R.A., Bhuta, S., Hermens, D.F., Lagopoulos, J., 2020. 
Neuroimaging characteristics of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS): a systematic review. J. Transl. Med. 18 (1), 335. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12967-020-02506-6.
Shen, Y., Fan, N., Ma, S.X., Cheng, X., Yang, X., Wang, G., 2025. Gut microbiota 
dysbiosis: pathogenesis, diseases, prevention, and therapy. MedComm 6 (5), e70168. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mco2.70168.
Simor, P., K¨oteles, F., B´odizs, R., B´ardos, G., 2009. A questionnaire based study of 
subjective sleep quality: the psychometric evaluation of the Hungarian version of the 
Groningen sleep quality scale. Ment´alhigi´en´e es Pszichoszomatika 10 (3), 249–261. 
https://doi.org/10.1556/mental.10.2009.3.5, 2009. 
Singh, P., Adhikari, A., Singh, D., Gond, C., Tiwari, A.K., 2022. The 18-kDa translocator 
protein PET tracers as a diagnostic marker for neuroinflammation: development and 
current standing. ACS Omega 7 (17), 14412–14429. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsomega.2c00588.
Smeets, T., Cornelisse, S., Quaedflieg, C.W., Meyer, T., Jelicic, M., Merckelbach, H., 
2012. Introducing the Maastricht Acute Stress Test (MAST): a quick and non-invasive 
approach to elicit robust autonomic and glucocorticoid stress responses. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 37 (12), 1998–2008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
psyneuen.2012.04.012.
Spitzer, R.L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J.B., L¨owe, B., 2006. A brief measure for assessing 
generalized anxiety disorder: the GAD-7. Arch. Intern. Med. 166 (10), 1092–1097. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.166.10.1092.
Stallmach, A., Quickert, S., Puta, C., Reuken, P.A., 2024. The gastrointestinal microbiota 
in the development of ME/CFS: a critical view and potential perspectives. Front. 
Immunol. 15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1352744, 2024. 
Stojanov, S., Berlec, A., Strukelj, B., 2020. The influence of probiotics on the firmicutes/ 
bacteroidetes ratio in the treatment of obesity and inflammatory bowel disease. 
Microorganisms 8 (11). https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms8111715.
Storey, J.D., 2002. A direct approach to false discovery rates. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. B Stat. 
Methodol. 64 (3), 479–498. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9868.00346.
Storey, J.D., Taylor, J.E., Siegmund, D., 2003. Strong control, conservative point 
estimation and simultaneous conservative consistency of false discovery rates: a 
unified approach. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 66 (1), 187–205. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2004.00439.x.
Strawbridge, R., Sartor, M.L., Scott, F., Cleare, A.J., 2019. Inflammatory proteins are 
altered in chronic fatigue syndrome-A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 107, 69–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neubiorev.2019.08.011.
Su, J., Thapaliya, K., Eaton-Fitch, N., Marshall-Gradisnik, S., Barnden, L., 2023. 
Connectivity between salience and default mode networks and subcortical nodes 
distinguishes between two classes of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Brain Connect. 13 (3), 164–173. https://doi.org/10.1089/ 
brain.2022.0049.
Sung, A.P., Tang, J.J., Guglielmo, M.J., Smith-Gagen, J., Bateman, L., Navarrete- 
Galvan, L., et al., 2020. Antibody-Dependent Cell-mediated Cytotoxicity (ADCC) in 
familial Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Fatigue 8 
(4), 226–244. https://doi.org/10.1080/21641846.2021.1876613.
Todhunter-Brown, A., Campbell, P., Broderick, C., et al., 2025. Recent Research in 
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic Fatigue Syndrome: an Evidence Map [Internet]. 
National Institute for Health and Care Research, Southampton (UK). https://doi.org/ 
10.3310/BTBD8846. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ 
NBK613143. 
Tokuda, T., Yoshimoto, J., Shimizu, Y., et al., 2017. Multiple co-clustering based on 
nonparametric mixture models with heterogeneous marginal distributions. PLoS One 
12 (10), e0186566. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0186566.
Torrado-Carvajal, A., Toschi, N., Albrecht, D.S., et al., 2021. Thalamic 
neuroinflammation as a reproducible and discriminating signature for chronic low 
back pain. Pain 162 (4), 1241–1249. https://doi.org/10.1097/j. 
pain.0000000000002108.
Tuzzolino, K., Jason, L.A., Furst, J., 2026. Identifying post-exertional malaise subtypes: 
differentiating physical and mental PEM manifestations. J. Health Psychol., 
13591053261420598 https://doi.org/10.1177/13591053261420598, 0(0). 
Vaessen, T., Reininghaus, U., Myin-Germeys, I., 2023. Stress assessment in daily life 
using the experience sampling method. In: P. Fauquet-Alekhine, J.E. (Ed.), The 
Palgrave Handbook of Occupational Stress. Springer, Berlin, pp. 117–136. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-27349-0_7.
van der Schaaf, M.E., Geerligs, L., Toni, I., Knoop, H., Oosterman, J.M., 2024. 
Disentangling pain and fatigue in chronic fatigue syndrome: a resting state 
connectivity study before and after cognitive behavioral therapy. Psychol. Med. 54 
(8), 1735–1748. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291723003690.
Vandeputte, D., Falony, G., Vieira-Silva, S., Tito, R.Y., Joossens, M., Raes, J., 2016. Stool 
consistency is strongly associated with gut microbiota richness and composition, 
enterotypes and bacterial growth rates. Gut 65 (1), 57–62. https://doi.org/10.1136/ 
gutjnl-2015-309618.
Vandermeulen, G., Rosseel, R., Chatonidi, G., Deroover, L., Boets, E., Verbeke, K., 2024. 
The optimization and validation of a gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
method to analyze the concentration of acetate, propionate and butyrate in human 
plasma or serum. J. Chromatogr., B: Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 1247, 124299. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2024.124299.
VanElzakker, M.B., Brumfield, S.A., Lara Mejia, P.S., 2018. Neuroinflammation and 
cytokines in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): a 
critical review of research methods. Front. Neurol. 9, 1033. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fneur.2018.01033.
Vercoulen, J.H., Swanink, C.M., Fennis, J.F., Galama, J.M., van der Meer, J.W., 
Bleijenberg, G., 1994. Dimensional assessment of chronic fatigue syndrome. 
J. Psychosom. Res. 38 (5), 383–392. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3999(94)90099- 
x.
Vøllestad, N.K., Mengshoel, A.M., 2023. Post-exertional malaise in daily life and 
experimental exercise models in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome. Front. Physiol. 14, 1257557. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fphys.2023.1257557.
Wackerhagen, C., Veer, I.M., van Leeuwen, J.M.C., et al., 2023. Dynamic modelling of 
mental resilience in young adults: protocol for a longitudinal observational study 
(DynaM-OBS). JMIR Res. Protoc. 12, e39817. https://doi.org/10.2196/39817.
Waller, L., Brovkin, A., Dorfschmidt, L., Bzdok, D., Walter, H., Kruschwitz, J.D., 2018. 
GraphVar 2.0: a user-friendly toolbox for machine learning on functional 
connectivity measures. J. Neurosci. Methods 308, 21–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jneumeth.2018.07.001.
Wang, J.H., Choi, Y., Lee, J.S., Hwang, S.J., Gu, J., Son, C.G., 2024. Clinical evidence of 
the link between gut microbiome and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a retrospective review. Eur. J. Med. Res. 29 (1), 148. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s40001-024-01747-1.
Wang, X., W, J., Yu, G., Domeniconi, C., Yu, Z., Zhang, Z., 2019. Discovering multiple Co- 
Clusterings with matrix factorization. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 51 (7), 3576–3587. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2019.2950568.
Ware, J.E.S.K., Kosinski, M., Gandek, B., 1993. SF-36 Health Survey Manual and 
Interpretation Guide. The Health Institute, New England Medical Center.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
16 

Ware, J.E.K.M., Keller, S.D., 1994. SF-36 Physical and Mental Health Summary Scales: a 
Users' Manual, second ed. The Health Institute, New England Medical Center.
Watson, D., Clark, L.A., Tellegen, A., 1988. Development and validation of brief 
measures of positive and negative affect: the PANAS scales. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 54 
(6), 1063–1070. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1063.
Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Nieto-Castanon, A., 2012. Conn: a functional connectivity toolbox 
for correlated and anticorrelated brain networks. Brain Connect. 2 (3), 125–141. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2012.0073.
Wolfe, F., Clauw, D.J., Fitzcharles, M.A., et al., 2010. The American College of 
Rheumatology preliminary diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia and measurement of 
symptom severity. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 62 (5), 600–610. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/acr.20140.
Woo, T.W., Choi, Y.J., Kim, J.Y., et al., 2026. Neuroendocrine signature of ME/CFS: 
Meta-analytic evidence for bioactive cortisol deficit and exaggerated feedback 
sensitivity. Mol. Psychiatr. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-026-03608-1.
Worm-Smeitink, M., Monden, R., Groen, R.N., et al., 2021. Towards personalized 
assessment of fatigue perpetuating factors in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome 
using ecological momentary assessment: a pilot study. J. Psychosom. Res. 140, 
110296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2020.110296.
Wortinger, L.A., Endestad, T., Melinder, A.M., Øie, M.G., Sevenius, A., Bruun Wyller, V., 
2016. Aberrant resting-state functional connectivity in the salience network of 
Adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS One 11 (7), e0159351. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0159351.
Wortinger, L.A., Glenne Øie, M., Endestad, T., Bruun Wyller, V., 2017. Altered right 
anterior insular connectivity and loss of associated functions in adolescent chronic 
fatigue syndrome. PLoS One 12 (9), e0184325. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0184325.
Yoshiuchi, K., Cook, D.B., Ohashi, K., et al., 2007. A real-time assessment of the effect of 
exercise in chronic fatigue syndrome. Physiol. Behav. 92 (5), 963–968. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.07.001.
Y. Dooms et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101299 
17 
