Immunoglobulin G complexes from post-infectious ME/CFS, including 
post-COVID ME/CFS disrupt cellular energetics and alter inflammatory 
marker secretion☆
Zheng Liu a, Claudia Hollmann a, Sharada Kalanidhi b, Stephanie Lamer c, Andreas Schlosser c,  
Emils Edgars Basens d, Georgy Nikolayshvili d, Liba Sokolovska d, Gabriela Riemekasten e,  
Rebekka Rust f,g, Judith Bellmann-Strobl f,g, Friedemann Paul f,g, Robert K. Naviaux h,  
Zaiga Nora-Krukle d, Franziska Sotzny i, Carmen Scheibenbogen i, Bhupesh K. Prusty a,d,*
a Institute of Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Germany
b Stanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
c Rudolf Virchow Center, Center for Translational Bioimaging, Julius-Maximilians-University of Würzburg, Germany
d Institute of Microbiology and Virology, Riga Stradin¸ˇs University Research Center, Riga, Latvia
e Klinik für Rheumatologie, Universit¨atsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany
f Experimental and Research Center (ECRC), Charit´e - Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Humboldt Universit¨at zu Berlin and 
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany
g NeuroCure Research Centre, Charit´e - Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin, Humboldt Universit¨at zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of 
Health, Berlin, Germany
h Departments of Medicine, Pediatrics, and Pathology, University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego, USA
i Institute of Medical Immunology, Charit´e – Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit¨at Berlin and Humboldt Universit¨at zu Berlin and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Immunoglobulin
Antigen
Antibody
Mitochondria
Post-viral chronic illnesses
ME/CFS
Post COVID
A B S T R A C T
Background: Autoimmunity is a key clinical feature in both post-infectious Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID (PASC). Passive transfer of immunoglobulins 
from patients' sera into mice induces some clinical features of PASC. However, the physiological effects of im­
munoglobulins on cellular alterations remain elusive. In this study, we tested the potential effects of immuno­
globulins from ME/CFS patients on endothelial cell dysfunction.
Methods: We have isolated immunoglobulins from 106 individuals, including ME/CFS (n = 39), PCS-CFS (n =
15), MS (n = 20) patients, and healthy controls (n = 41). Protein composition of the isolated immune complexes 
was studied using mass spectrometry. The effect of isolated immune complexes on mitochondria was evaluated 
using confocal microscopy and a Seahorse XFe96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer, and the impact on inflammatory 
cytokine secretion was studied using a multiplex bead-based assay.
Results: Here, we demonstrate that IgG isolated from post-infectious ME/CFS patients selectively induces mito­
chondrial fragmentation in human endothelial cells and alters cellular energetics. This effect is lost upon 
cleavage of IgG into its Fab and Fc fragments. The digested Fab fragment from ME/CFS alone was able to alter the 
cellular energetics, resembling the effect of intact IgG. IgG from post-infectious ME/CFS, including post-COVID 
ME/CFS patients, induced distinct but separate cytokine secretion profiles in healthy PBMCs. Proteomics analysis 
of IgG-bound immune complexes revealed significant changes in immune complexes from ME/CFS patients, 
affecting extracellular matrix organization, whereas those from post-COVID ME/CFS patients pointed to alter­
ations in hemostasis and blood clot regulation.
Conclusions: We demonstrate that IgGs from ME/CFS patients carry a chronic protective stress response that 
promotes mitochondrial adaptation via fragmentation, without altering mitochondrial ATP generation capacity 
☆One Sentence Summary: IgG immune complexes from ME/CFS patients differ from those of healthy individuals and affect mitochondrial structure and 
energetics.
* Corresponding author. Institute of Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Germany.
E-mail address: bhupesh.prusty@rsu.lv (B.K. Prusty). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health
journal homepage: www.editorialmanager.com/bbih/default.aspx
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbih.2026.101187
Received 23 January 2026; Accepted 25 January 2026  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
Available online 4 February 2026 
2666-3546/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 

in endothelial cells. Together, these results highlight a potential pathogenic role of IgG in post-infectious ME/CFS 
and point to novel therapeutic strategies targeting antibody-mediated metabolic dysregulation.
1. Background
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) is 
a complex, debilitating, chronic, long-term illness that involves immune 
dysfunction, autonomic nervous system dysfunction, and metabolic al­
terations (Myhill et al., 2009; Mandarano et al., 2020; Zinn and Jason, 
2021). Key symptoms of ME/CFS include fatigue, which can be both 
mental and physical in nature, such as post-exertional malaise (PEM) 
(Brown and Jason, 2020), cognitive dysfunction (“brain fog”), etc 
(Cvejic et al., 2016).
Emerging evidence implicates endothelial cell dysfunction as a key 
contributor to the chronicity of ME/CFS. Recent studies have observed 
reduced macro- and microvascular endothelial function in ME/CFS pa­
tients compared to matched controls, suggesting impaired vasodilation 
and compromised vascular homeostasis (Sandvik et al., 2023; Haffke 
et al., 2022). Endothelial cells, by virtue of their role in regulating blood 
flow, nutrient and oxygen delivery, and leukocyte trafficking, become 
central in this pathology. Endothelial cell dysfunction can provide a 
unifying explanation for both physical and mental fatigue in ME/CFS 
and its persistence over time. Endothelial dysfunction can lead to a 
combination of vascular, metabolic, and neuro-immune perturbations 
that create a self-reinforcing feedback loop, locking patients into a state 
of chronic, disproportionate fatigue and worsening post-exertional 
symptoms. In vitro experiments showed that endothelial cells exposed 
to plasma from ME/CFS patients secreted less nitric oxide (NO) and 
exhibited reduced eNOS activity, linking circulating factors to impaired 
endothelial responsiveness (Bertinat et al., 2022).
ME/CFS patients frequently exhibit altered regulation of the auto­
nomic and immune systems (Sotzny et al., 2018). In recent years, several 
studies have focused on the role of autoimmunity in ME/CFS, showing 
elevated levels of antibodies targeting β2 adrenergic receptors (β2 AdR) 
and muscarinic M3 and M4 acetylcholine receptors in subsets of ME/CFS 
patients (Bynke et al., 2020; Loebel et al., 2016; Scheibenbogen et al., 
2018; Hartwig et al., 2020). The correlation of these autoantibodies with 
clinical symptoms suggests their functional role in ME/CFS (Sotzny 
et al., 2022). Two recent studies reported the induction of ME/CFS and 
long COVID-like symptoms in mice following the passive transfer of IgG 
from patients (Chen et al., 2024; Santos Guedes de Sa et al., 2024). These 
findings collectively highlight the potential role of autoantibodies in the 
pathophysiology of ME/CFS, particularly in disrupting the regulation of 
autonomic and immune systems. In this study, we investigated the po­
tential role of circulating human IgGs in mitochondrial, cellular, and 
immunological alterations in vitro.
2. Results
2.1. Passive transfer of IgGs from ME/CFS patients induces mitochondrial 
fragmentation
Mitochondrial alterations are among the most powerful drivers of 
endothelial cell dysfunction because endothelial cells rely heavily on 
tightly regulated mitochondrial signaling, not primarily for ATP pro­
duction, but for redox balance, nitric oxide (NO) signaling, calcium 
handling, and inflammatory control. When mitochondrial homeostasis 
is disrupted, multiple endothelial pathways essential for vascular health 
collapse simultaneously. Immune dysregulation is closely associated 
with mitochondrial dysfunction, which is a characteristic feature of ME/ 
CFS. Several groups, including ours, have previously shown that serum- 
derived unknown factors from ME/CFS patients can induce mitochon­
drial alterations in healthy cells (Schreiner et al., 2020; Fluge et al., 
2016; Esfandyarpour et al., 2019). A lack of complement activation and 
pathogen clearance can allow several opportunistic pathogens to repli­
cate, resulting in the production of a wide array of IgG and IgM auto­
antibodies in the serum. We hypothesized that some of the altered 
antibodies in serum or altered antigen-antibody complexes might induce 
chronic mitochondrial dysfunction. To investigate this in vitro, we pu­
rified IgGs (Fig. 1A) from human serum and exposed them to two in­
dependent cell types, primary human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) and 
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), and followed 
their entry into the cells using immunoblotting (Fig. 1B). HUVECs were 
permissive to human IgG, while HFFs did not allow entry of IgG into the 
cells (Fig. 1C), suggesting cell-specific selective entry of IgG into human 
cells. IgG entry into HUVEC cells was also confirmed using immuno­
fluorescence staining of human IgG (Fig. 1D). IgG that entered HUVEC 
cells was efficiently detectable up to 16 h post-exposure (Fig. 1E). 
However, IgG levels decreased within the cells in a time-dependent 
manner (Fig. 1E), suggesting potential IgG recycling and degradation 
within the cell. Fc-specific fragments (~35 kDa) of IgG remained 
abundantly detectable within the cells till 48 h post-exposure (Fig. 1E). 
No significant differences in IgG entry and survival of Fc-specific IgG 
fragments were observed between different disease groups (Fig. 1F).
Exposure to as low as 1 μg/ml of IgGs from ME/CFS and PCS-CFS 
patients significantly fragmented mitochondria in HUVECs within 16 
h of exposure, as assessed by confocal imaging (Fig. 2A) and subsequent 
quantification of average mitochondrial surface area (Fig. 2B). Although 
the statistical significance for changes in average mitochondrial surface 
area was strong for the ME/CFS cohort (HD vs. ME/CFS, P = 0.0004), 
IgG-induced alterations in mitochondrial surface area were not distinct 
in the entire ME/CFS cohort. Only a subgroup of patients induced sig­
nificant mitochondrial fragmentation. Hence, we conducted a gender- 
based analysis, which revealed substantial IgG-induced mitochondrial 
fragmentation in female ME/CFS and PCS-CFS patients compared with 
male patients (Fig. 2C). IgG-induced mitochondrial fragmentation was 
also not observed when cells were exposed to IgGs from patients with 
multiple sclerosis (Fig. 2B–C). Multiple linear regression analysis 
involving disease severity (as measured by Bell score), gender, and 
average mitochondrial surface area did not show any significant asso­
ciations in ME/CFS and PCS-CFS (Supplementary Fig. S1; see Supple­
mentary methods for more details). However, disease severity was 
significantly predictive of average mitochondrial surface area in MS 
patients.
Drp1 protein play a key role in mitochondrial fragmentation and its 
functional significance in mitochondrial quality control (Wang et al., 
2025). Hence, we tested if IgG-induced mitochondrial fragmentation is 
Drp1-dependent. IgG from ME/CFS and PCS-CFS patients decreased the 
protein levels of Drp1, mitofilin, Miga1, and PLD6 (Fig. 2D and E). 
Interestingly, the levels of the mitophagy marker protein LC3β showed a 
trend toward decreased levels in the presence of IgG from ME/CFS and 
PCS-CSF patients (Fig. 2D and E), but this difference was not statistically 
significant. Blocking the Fc receptors on the HUVEC cell surface did not 
completely prevent IgG entry into cells (Fig. 2F). Higher concentrations 
of the Fc blocker resulted in decreased IgG entry (Fig. 2F). However, 
there was significant cell loss at that concentration, as evident from a 
decrease in Drp1, p53, Tom20, and Vinculin protein levels. To under­
stand the mechanism of IgG entry into cells, we digested IgG and 
separated both Fab and Fc fragments (Fig. 2G). Both fragments were 
able to enter the cell with equal efficiency (Fig. 2H). However, separated 
Fab and Fc fragments did not induce a fragmented mitochondrial 
phenotype (Fig. 2I) with the same efficiency as their IgG counterpart. 
These results suggest that intact IgG from ME/CFS patients induces 
mitochondrial fragmentation, which might be independent of the clas­
sical Drp1-induced pathways.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
2 

2.2. IgGs from ME/CFS patients alter cellular energetics
We then asked if IgG-induced changes in mitochondrial architecture 
also alter mitochondrial energetics. To assess the functional changes in 
the cellular energetics profile, we performed mitochondrial stress tests 
using the Seahorse XFe96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Following 36 h 
IgG exposure, HUVECs were analyzed for changes in oxygen consump­
tion rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR). Sequential 
injections of oligomycin, FCCP, and rotenone/antimycin A allowed for 
assessment of mitochondrial respiration parameters. Given the pro­
nounced and well-documented interplate variability in the seahorse 
assay, as evident in our data and others (Yepez et al., 2018; 
Mercier-Letondal et al., 2021), we conducted our assays in two separate 
groups. Each group included IgG from ME/CFS patients, either with a 
strong mitochondrial fragmentation phenotype or without it. On each 
assay plate, we tested 10 healthy controls, 10 ME/CFS patients, and 
either 10 PCS-CFS patients or 10 MS patients. IgG from healthy controls, 
PCS-CFS, and MS patients induced similar OCR patterns in HUVECs, 
while HUVECs exposed to IgG from ME/CFS patients with mitochondrial 
fragmentation phenotype exhibited a trend towards higher basal respi­
ration (not statistically significant) and significantly increased (Fig. 3A) 
spared respiration capacity. However, this phenomenon was not detec­
ted with IgG from ME/CFS patients without a mitochondrial fragmen­
tation phenotype (Supplementary Fig. S2A). This suggests that 
Fig. 1. Selective entry of IgG into human cells and its turnover. 
A. The quality and quantity of purified IgG were assessed by running them on denaturing SDS-PAGE gels and staining with Coomassie. 
B. Schematics of IgG entry assay. 
C. Immunoblot analysis reveals the presence of intracellular IgG heavy and light chains in HUVECs, but not in HFFs, following exposure to 1 μg/mL purified IgG from 
ME/CFS patients or control sera for 12 h. Vinculin was used as a loading control. 
D. Confocal microscopy images show intracellular human IgG in primary HUVECs exposed to 1 μg/mL purified IgG from patient and control sera. Two representative 
images are shown for each condition. 
E. Immunoblot analysis reveals degradation of intracellular IgG heavy and light chains in HUVECs at 16, 36, 48, and 72 h following exposure to 1 μg/mL purified IgG 
from ME/CFS patients or control sera. Vinculin was used as a loading control. Fc-specific secondary antibody was used (middle panel) to detect the full-length heavy 
chain of IgG and cleaved Fc fragments. 
F. Immunoblot analysis comparing intracellular IgG heavy and Fc-specific fragments in HUVECs at 16 h following exposure to 1 μg/mL purified IgG from HD, ME/ 
CFS, and PCS-CFS patient sera. Vinculin was used as a loading control. Fc-specific secondary antibody was used to detect the full-length heavy chain of IgG and 
cleaved Fc fragments.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
3 

(caption on next page)
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
4 

IgG-induced mitochondrial fragmentation is directly associated with 
increased spared respiration capacity. In the meantime, ECAR, which 
indicates glycolytic activity, showed no differences in patterns. Baseline 
ECAR levels were comparable among all four patient groups (Fig. 3B, 
Supplementary Fig. S2B). ATP measurement assays did not reveal any 
significant changes in glycolytic, mitochondrial, or total ATP levels in 
response to IgG treatment (Supplementary Fig. S2C–S2H).
To force the cells to rely exclusively on oxidative phosphorylation 
(OXPHOS), we replaced glucose-containing culture media with 
galactose-containing media, thereby isolating mitochondrial function 
from glycolysis. Due to the substitution with galactose, the cells had 
already reached their maximum respiratory capacity at baseline 
(Fig. 3C). In contrast to cells cultured in glucose-containing media, 
HUVECs exposed to IgGs from the three study groups did not exhibit 
differences in OCR or ECAR patterns (Fig. 3D). These results showed that 
the ME/CFS IgG-induced increase in maximal respiratory capacity of 
cells is possibly not compensated by mitochondrial oxidative phos­
phorylation alone, and the observed effect is masked when cells are 
forced to rely solely on OXPHOS.
We then compared the potential effects of separated Fab and Fc 
fragments on cellular energetics to those of the intact IgGs. Fab frag­
ments of IgG mimicked the intact IgG effects of ME/CFS patients 
(Fig. 4A), indicating their predominant role in increasing the respiration 
of HUVECs induced by IgGs from ME/CFS. On the contrary, Fc frag­
ments from healthy controls induced an overall metabolic rate of 
respiration in HUVECs. This was also reflected in total, glycolytic, as 
well as mitochondrial ATP levels of HUVECs in the presence of Fc 
fragment from healthy controls (Fig. 4B). However, due to large varia­
tions in ATP counts across the 5 healthy controls, we could not detect a 
statistically significant difference in ATP levels in these studies (Fig. 4B). 
Taken together, our results suggest that IgG-induced alterations in 
mitochondrial morphology and energetics are potentially two inde­
pendent phenotypes.
2.3. IgGs from ME/CFS patients induce secretion of specific inflammatory 
cytokines
Mitochondria play a significant role beyond energetics. Alterations 
in mitochondrial structure and function can release various mitochon­
drial components and metabolic products that can function as damage- 
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and promote inflammation 
when released into the cytosol (Marchi et al., 2023). Alternatively, 
direct interaction of IgG-TLR complexed ligands can induce 
pro-inflammatory cytokines (Vogelpoel et al., 2014). Therefore, we 
tested whether passive transfer of IgG to healthy PBMCs can trigger 
inflammatory markers often associated with the ME/CFS (Fig. 5A). Ten 
well-known cytokines were measured in a multiplexed bead-based 
assay. The same IgGs were exposed to two separate PBMC samples 
from independent healthy donors, and two independent biological 
replicates were carried out for each IgG treatment. IgGs from a large 
subset of ME/CFS patients induced the secretion of four cytokines, 
including IL-1β (P = 0.0460, IFNγ (P = 0.0675), TNFα (P = 0.1653) and 
IL-6 (P = 0.0675), (Fig. 5B). However, this inflammatory cytokine in­
duction phenotype was not uniform for all ME/CFS patients, making the 
differences statistically insignificant (Fig. 5B) except for IL-1β. Notably, 
48 h exposure of PBMCs to IgG from MS patients significantly induced 
the levels of 3 cytokines, including IL-5, IL-10, and TNFβ, and reduced 
levels of TGFα (Fig. 5B). A similar trend was also observed when PBMCs 
were treated with IgG from PCS-CFS patients. However, IgGs from 
ME/CFS patients had no effect on the secretion of these cytokines. Levels 
of IFNα2 were not altered by IgG from all 4 study groups. We verified 
alterations in some of these cytokines using alternative ELISA-based 
commercial assays (Supplementary Fig. S3A) that mostly replicated 
the multiplex assay results. In these studies, IgGs from ME/CFS patients 
exhibited a contrasting phenotype compared with those from PCS-CFS 
patients. In summary, these results demonstrated that patient IgG can 
induce the secretion of specific inflammatory cytokines; however, they 
could not establish a direct causal link between IgG-induced mito­
chondrial fragmentation and inflammation, suggesting a role for a 
mitochondria-independent pathway.
Fig. 2. IgG from ME/CFS patients induces mitochondrial fragmentation. 
A. Representative confocal microscopy images show mitochondrial architecture in primary HUVECs expressing stable GFP within mitochondria and exposed to 1 μg/ 
mL purified IgG from ME/CFS, PCS-CFS, and MS patient and control sera. One representative image is shown for each condition. 
B. Quantification of average mitochondrial surface area in primary HUVECs exposed to 1 μg/mL purified IgG from ME/CFS (n = 39), PCS-CFS (n = 15), MS (n = 20) 
patients, and healthy controls (n = 41). At least 10 cells were imaged per sample, derived from 3 replicates. In the left panel, each point represents the mean surface 
area across all images for each subject. In the right panel, each point represents the surface area measured from a single image. Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. 
(Left) HD vs ME/CFS, ***P = 0.0004. HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0164. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.8676. (Right) HD vs ME/CFS, ****P < 0.0001. HD vs PCS-CFS, **P = 0.0067. 
HD vs MS, ns P = 0.4794. 
C. Gender-based separation of average mitochondrial surface area from the above experiment. Each point represents the surface area measured from a single image. 
Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (Female) HD vs ME/CFS, **P = 0.0018. HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0173. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.4938. (Male) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P =
0.0976. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.5058. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.4462. 
D. Capillary-based automated Immunoblot analysis of Mitofilin, Drp1, TIMM23, PLD6, Miga1, LC3β, Pink1 protein levels in HUVEC cells 36 h after exposure to 1 μg/ 
mL of purified IgG from ME/CFS (n = 12), PCS-CFS (n = 12), and MS (n = 11) patient and control (n = 12) sera. Vinculin was used as a loading control. 
E. Fold change values from the above immunoblot analysis were derived from densitometric analysis of bands, normalized to the same value for vinculin. Two-tailed 
Mann-Whitney U test. (Drp1) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.0684. HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0387. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.7859. (PLD6) HD vs ME/CFS, ****P < 0.0001. HD vs 
PCS-CFS, ***P = 0.0007. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.6075. (Timm23) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.1402. HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0317. HD vs MS, *P = 0.0106. (Miga1) HD vs 
ME/CFS, *P = 0.0284. HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0449. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.1896. (LC3β) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.0684. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.1600. HD vs MS, ns P 
= 0.6075. (Mitofilin) HD vs ME/CFS, **P = 0.0056. HD vs PCS-CFS, **P = 0.0029. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.3164. 
F. Immunoblot analysis shows a decreased amount of intracellular IgG heavy and light chains in HUVECs pretreated with Fc blocker before the exposure to 1 μg/mL 
purified IgG from ME/CFS patients or control sera for 12 h. Vinculin was used as a loading control. 
G. Schematics of IgG cleavage assay. 
H. Immunoblot analysis shows the presence of intracellular IgG heavy and light chains in HUVECs after exposure to 1 μg/mL purified IgG, purified Fab fragments, and 
Fc fragments from ME/CFS patients or control sera for 12 h. Vinculin was used as a loading control. Fc-specific secondary antibody was used (second panel) to detect 
the full-length heavy chain of IgG and cleaved Fc fragments. 
I. Quantification of average mitochondrial surface area in primary HUVECs exposed to 1 μg/mL purified IgG or Fab Fragment or Fc fragment from 5 ME/CFS, and 5 
controls. In the upper panel, each point represents the mean surface area across all images for each individual. In the lower panel, each point represents the surface 
area measured from a single image. Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (Upper Panel) HD vs ME/CFS IgG, *P = 0.0317. HD vs ME/CFS Fab, ns P = 0.8413. HD vs ME/ 
CFS Fc, ns P = 0.6905. (Lower Panel) HD vs ME/CFS IgG, *P = 0.0130. HD vs ME/CFS Fab, ns P = 0.5572. HD vs ME/CFS Fc, ns P = 0.3662. (For interpretation of the 
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
5 

2.4. Autoantibodies as a potential cause of mitochondrial fragmentation
IgG-induced mitochondrial fragmentation can be caused by specific 
autoantibodies enriched in ME/CFS and PCS-CFS patients. Numerous 
publications have shown that one or more autoantibodies are elevated in 
ME/CFS patients, making it challenging to correlate a specific autoan­
tibody with the mitochondrial phenotype. We conducted a proof-of- 
concept pilot study utilizing commercial protein microarrays. To test 
potential IgG and IgM responses to selective autoantigens frequently 
involved in autoimmune diseases, we measured IgG and IgM levels 
against 120 autoantigens (Supplementary Table 2) in a small cohort of 
mild-to-severe ME/CFS patients (n = 12) and healthy controls (n = 3). 
Samples were blinded throughout the experimental procedure and data 
analysis. Multivariate clustering of log-transformed data revealed that 
patients could be separated into distinct groups, comprising healthy, 
mild/moderate, and severe patients (Fig. 5C), based on IgM antibody 
levels against antigens such as PCNA, collagen V and VI, complement 
C3, and CRP (Fig. 5D–F). IgM against fibronectin was negatively asso­
ciated with disease severity. A similar analysis of IgG levels against 
autoantigens failed to differentiate cases from controls (Supplementary 
Fig. S3B). One major limitation of our current approach, Sepharose G 
bead-based IgG purification, is that it does not purify the majority of 
natural IgM, which are pentameric structures, making it challenging to 
correlate IgM autoantibody levels to mitochondrial fragmentation. 
While these results suggest that IgM levels against known autoantigens 
can distinguish between ME/CFS disease groups and healthy in­
dividuals, they may not be responsible for mitochondrial fragmentation.
2.5. Proteomic analysis of immune complexes
Immunoglobulin-mediated alterations in cellular energetics could be 
transmitted via antigen-antibody complexes. ME/CFS is closely associ­
ated with immune dysregulation, yet no definitive biomarkers have been 
identified. Plasma proteomic analysis has been shown to be a powerful 
tool to identify biomarkers in certain diseases (Ward et al., 2024; Geyer 
et al., 2017), including ME/CFS (Germain et al., 2021; Milivojevic et al., 
2020). Purified IgG from human serum mainly contains immunoglob­
ulin fractions with freely available Fc receptors along with associated 
immune complex proteins. Unlike plasma proteomics, which analyzes 
all circulating proteins, immune complex proteomics enriches for 
antibody-bound proteins, making it specific for identifying immune 
complex-related proteins and disease-specific immune functions, such as 
those associated with autoimmune diseases. To identify fine changes 
within the immune complex compositions, we carried out mass spec­
trometry analysis of purified immunoglobulin fractions from ME/CFS (n 
= 40), PCS-CFS (n = 16), healthy controls (n = 39), and multiple scle­
rosis (n = 11) (Fig. 6A). Our analysis did not detect any EBV or HHV-6A 
protein signature within the immune complex proteome. Based on the 
Fig. 3. ME/CFS IgGs alter metabolic energetics in HUVECs. 
(A-D) Cellular energetics profiles from Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test are shown from HUVECs exposed to 1 μg/mL IgGs from healthy control (HD) (n = 10), ME/ 
CFS (n = 10), PCS-CFS (n = 10) patients. Normalized OCR (A, C) and normalized ECAR (B, D) are shown. 
For A-B, HUVECs were grown in medium containing glucose and for C-D, cells were grown in galactose containing media. 
Each patient IgG was exposed to independent cells in three separate wells on each assay plate. Additionally, the same assay was performed at least three times on 
three separate days, and one representative result is shown here.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
6 

identified peptide signatures, we conducted a 3D principal component 
analysis (PCA) that nicely separated healthy controls from all three 
disease groups. Although there was no clear separation among the three 
disease groups, ME/CFS patients clustered slightly farther from the 
PCS-CFS and MS groups (Fig. 6B), as indicated by specific proteins that 
distinguished the individual comparison groups (Fig. 6C). A fold-change 
analysis was conducted to identify the most significant up- and 
down-regulated proteins within the immune complex across different 
groups (Fig. 6D–G). Immune complexes from ME/CFS patients were 
enriched for several immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region genes 
(IGHVs), including IGHV1-58, IGHV4-8, IGHV3-16, IGHV3-66, and 
IGHV1-69-2 (Fig. 6D). Interestingly, striated muscle-enriched protein 
kinase (SPEG), important for muscle maintenance, a kinase involved in 
muscle development and calcium handling, and Carboxypeptidase N 
Subunit 1 (CPN1), a metalloprotease and a plasma metalloenzyme that 
regulates inflammatory peptides, were also increased within the im­
mune complex of ME/CFS patients. One key protein involved in blood 
hemostasis, immune modulation, and vascularization, called Von Wil­
lebrand Factor (VWF) was significantly decreased within the immune 
complex of ME/CFS patients (Fig. 6C and D). IGHV1-58 showed 
increased presence within the Immune complexes of PCS-CFS patients 
(Fig. 6E) along with the protein kallikrein B (KLKB1). Similarly, 
IGHV3-16 was enriched within the immune complex of MS patients 
(Fig. 6F).
We hypothesized that proteins that do not typically bind to immune 
complexes and are elevated within immune complexes from patients 
with a particular disease may represent proteins targeted by disease- 
specific autoantibodies (Fig. 7A). Similarly, proteins that decrease 
within the immune complexes of a specific disease are potentially 
essential for the correct functioning and regulation of the immune 
Fig. 4. Fab and Fc fragments of IgG have variable effects on metabolic energetics in HUVECs. 
A. Normalized OCR and ECAR in HUVECs exposed to 1 μg/mL IgGs, Fab fragments, and Fc fragments from the same 5 ME/CFS and 5 healthy controls measured by 
Seahorse assay mito stress test. 
B-D. Seahorse real-time ATP rate assay in HUVECs exposed to 1 μg/mL IgGs, Fab fragments, and Fc fragments from the same 5 ME/CFS and 5 controls. 
B. Glycolytic ATP production rate. HD-IgG vs ME/CFS-IgG, ns P = 0.3095. HD-Fab vs ME/CFS-Fab, ns P = 0.1508. HD-Fc vs ME/CFS-Fc, ns P = 0.0952. 
C. Mitochondrial ATP production rate. HD-IgG vs ME/CFS-IgG, ns P = 0.4524. HD-Fab vs ME/CFS-Fab, ns P = 0.0635. HD-Fc vs ME/CFS-Fc, ns P = 0.2222. 
D. Total ATP production rate. HD-IgG vs ME/CFS-IgG, ns P = 0.3095. HD-Fab vs ME/CFS-Fab, ns P = 0.1032. HD-Fc vs ME/CFS-Fc, ns P = 0.0952.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
7 

(caption on next page)
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
8 

system. These proteins may not be downregulated at the translational 
level. Instead, they may not be incorporated into the immune complex 
for some reason and, therefore, accumulate more in the serum and vice 
versa (Fig. 7A). To validate this, we tested serum levels of several po­
tential proteins that were either up- or down-regulated within the im­
mune complex. KLKB-1 protein, which showed a significantly increased 
presence within the immune complex of PCS-CFS patients (Fig. 6C), 
exhibited a trend of decreased presence in the total serum (P = 0.126) 
(Fig. 7B), but showed a significant decrease in the serum of ME/CFS 
patients (P = 0.005). AZU1, which showed reduced presence within the 
immune complex across all three disease groups (Fig. 6C), exhibited a 
trend toward increased serum levels in PCS-CSF patients (P = 0.115) 
(Fig. 7B). VWF levels within the immune complex showed a trend of 
increased presence in the total serum of PCS-CSF patients (P = 0.160) 
(Fig. 7B). FCN2 and serotransferrin (TF) were detected in reduced 
amounts within the immune complexes of all 3 disease groups and 
showed a significant increase in serum in these patients (Fig. 7C). The 
SPEG protein showed a comparative difference in its presence within the 
immune complex of HD and ME/CFS patients (Fig. 6C and D); however, 
it was barely detectable in the serum of a few patients by ELISA, making 
validation difficult.
We performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using the im­
mune complex proteome data. Only one significant positive enrichment 
for extracellular matrix reorganization was observed in the GSEA 
Reactome analysis of the immune proteome in ME/CFS patients 
compared to healthy controls (Fig. 7D). No significant enrichment was 
observed in the immune proteome of PCS-CSF and MS patients. How­
ever, several significant differences were observed when the immune 
proteome of ME/CFS patients was compared to PCS-CSF. Gene Ontology 
(GO) analysis of biological processes showed a decreased response to 
bacterial infection in PCS-CSF patients (Fig. 7E). GSEA Reactome anal­
ysis revealed increased hemostasis (Fig. 7F), platelet activation 
(Fig. 7G), platelet Ca2+ response (Fig. 7H), and fibrin clot formation 
(Fig. 7I) in the PCS-CSF patient immune proteome compared to ME/CFS. 
These results suggest specific alterations in the immune proteome of 
ME/CFS patients that distinguish them from healthy controls and PCS- 
CFS patients.
3. Discussions
We have recently demonstrated serum-transferrable innate immune 
activity in ME/CFS patients that induces a state of low mitochondrial 
activity, accompanied by changes in mitochondrial dynamics that may 
contribute to the disease's pathophysiology (Schreiner et al., 2020). 
Immunoglobulins are a potential candidate serum factor responsible for 
mitochondrial alterations. Several studies have suggested a possible role 
for autoantibodies in mitochondrial dysfunction (Kadaja et al., 2004; 
Klein and Berg, 1990). In this study, we investigated human IgG com­
plexes as a potential serum-derived component and their roles in mito­
chondrial morphology, mitochondrial and cellular energetics, and 
inflammation. Here, we demonstrate that IgG from post-infectious 
ME/CFS 
patients 
induces 
mitochondrial 
fragmentation 
in 
a 
cell-specific manner without altering the cells' ATP-generating capacity. 
We showed IgG from female patients had a tendency to fragment 
mitochondria more effectively than IgG from male patients. This sug­
gests that IgGs from ME/CFS and PCS-CFS patients can directly influence 
mitochondrial dynamics and correlate with the gender differences 
observed in these diseases. However, we did not observe a correlation 
between IgG-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and disease severity 
in ME/CFS and PCS-CFS (Supplementary Fig. S1). Interestingly, 
IgG-induced changes in mitochondrial surface area significantly pre­
dicted disease severity in patients with MS. Current results are not 
enough to explain these correlation results, but the physiological dif­
ferences in IgG's effect on mitochondria separate MS from both ME/CFS 
and PCS-CFS. This also suggests that mitochondrial fragmentation is not 
a general feature of autoimmune conditions but may be disease-specific 
and involve disease-specific autoantibodies. Further analysis revealed 
that this mitochondrial fragmentation is not caused by excessive mito­
chondrial fission, which is typically mediated by Drp1. Instead, we 
observed a general reduction in multiple mitochondrial proteins, 
including Drp1, PLD6, Miga1, and mitofilin (Fig. 2D), indicating po­
tential mitochondrial destabilization and degradation in ME/CFS, which 
was not observed in MS.
In our study, IgGs from ME/CFS patients induced distinct metabolic 
energetics, which likely connect to the mitochondrial structural changes 
observed earlier. IgGs from ME/CFS patients increased mitochondrial 
respiration and glycolytic activity (Fig. 3A), suggesting that endothelial 
cells were under high energy demand in the presence of IgG, a possible 
indication of cellular stress. To assess mitochondrial function indepen­
dent of glycolysis, we replaced glucose with galactose in the assay me­
dium, which forces cells to rely exclusively on OXPHOS. The higher 
spared respiration capacity induced by IgGs from ME/CFS was not dis­
played anymore in the presence of galactose (Fig. 3C), suggesting 
glycolytic compensation as a primary source of stress in ME/CFS. 
However, this can be cell type dependent, as HUVECs rely heavily on 
glycolysis. Another study has reported a significant increase in ATP 
production in PBMCs from ME/CFS, primarily due to non-mitochondrial 
respiration, such as glycolysis (Lawson et al., 2016). Here, we demon­
strate that IgGs from ME/CFS exhibit greater glycolytic compensation. 
Elevated glycolysis could potentially lead to oxidative stress, increased 
ROS production (Shankar et al., 2025), and impaired energy meta­
bolism, ultimately contributing to mitochondrial dysfunction (Hu et al., 
2012; Bhatti et al., 2017). Interestingly, IgGs from PCS-CFS patients did 
not alter the cellular energetics to the same level as those from ME/CFS 
patients. Overall, ME/CFS IgGs induced mitochondrial fragmentation 
and metabolic stress, without necessarily impairing oxidative phos­
phorylation (OXPHOS) function in HUVECs. We did not observe sig­
nificant alterations in IgG-induced mitochondrial ATP generation in 
HUVEC cells. This is expected as endothelial cells rely on glycolysis for 
basal energy. But they need mitochondria for other major activities, 
Fig. 5. IgG induces inflammation and an autoantibody signature in ME/CFS. 
A. Schematics of experimental setup to measure inflammatory cytokines produced by IgG-induced inflammation. 
B. Violin plots showing results of multiplex bead-based assays to measure secreted inflammatory cytokines from PBMCs of two healthy donors after 48 h of exposure 
of PBMCs to IgG from ME/CFS (n = 20), PCS-CFS (n = 15), MS (n = 11), and healthy donors (n = 20). Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (IL-1β) HD vs ME/CFS, *P =
0.0460. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.4785. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.7132. (IFNγ) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.0675; HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.9345; HD vs MS, ns P = 0.8550. 
(TNFα) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.1653. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.8307. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.1566. (IL-6) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.0675; HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.9345; 
HD vs MS, ns P = 0.9514. (IL-5) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.8201, ***P = 0.0005; HD vs MS, **P = 0.0030. (IL-10) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.4612; HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P 
= 0.0545; HD vs MS, **P = 0.0016. (TGFα) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.7329. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.2302. HD vs MS, *P = 0.0144. (TNFβ) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P =
0.6783; HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0143; HD vs MS, *P = 0.0202. (IFNα2) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.1803. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.5366. HD vs MS, ns P = 0.7838. 
C. Multivariate analysis of clusters based on distance metrics derived from IgM antibody levels for a panel of autoantigens. Log-transformed scaled data showing 
relative differences between different variables in both healthy controls and patients. 
D. The Variables Factor map for the Principal Components (combining data from patients and healthy controls) shows the projection of the top 10 Autoantigen 
variables onto the plane spanned by the first two Principal Components. 
E. The Contribution map shows the contributions of the top 10 Autoantigens to the top 10 dimensions. 
F. Biplot of PCA analysis showing the plot of individuals for the PCA in the Fig. 5C-D.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
9 

Fig. 6. Immune proteome analysis shows distinct alterations in disease groups. 
A. Schematics of IgG-bound immune complex mass spectrometry-based proteomics. 
B. 3-Dimensional Principal Component Analysis (PCA) showing distribution of various disease groups and healthy controls on 3 different axis (PC1, PC2, and PC3). 
ME/CFS (n = 39), PCS-CFS (n = 15), MS (n = 11) patients, and healthy controls (n = 41). 
C. Venn diagram showing differentially detected proteins and commonly detected proteins within individual comparison groups as detected from mass spectrometry 
analysis of the immune proteome. 
D-G. Volcano plots of log2 fold changes and log10 adjusted P values for individual proteins detected by mass spectrometry. Top candidate genes upregulated (red) or 
downregulated (blue) with logFC >1 and adjusted P value < 0.05 are indicated. 
Differentially detected proteins between healthy controls (HD) and ME/CFS (D), HD vs PCS-CFS (E), HD vs MS (F), and ME/CFS vs PCS-CFS (G). (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
10 

Fig. 7. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) identified key altered pathways in patients with ME/CFS. 
A. Schematics showing potential alterations within antigen-antibody complexes and their effect on immunity. 
B. Serum KLKB1, AZU1, and VWF levels in healthy controls, ME/CFS, and PCS-CFS patients. Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (KLKB1) HD vs ME/CFS, **P = 0.0046. 
HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.1286. (AZU1) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.5123. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P = 0.1054. (VWF) HD vs ME/CFS, ns P = 0.3705. HD vs PCS-CFS, ns P =
0.1642. 
C. Serum FCN2 and TF levels in healthy controls, ME/CFS, PCS-CFS, Systemic Sclerosis (SS) and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients. Two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. 
(FCN2) HD vs ME/CFS, *P = 0.0287. HD vs SS, *P = 0.0104. (TF) HD vs ME/CFS, ****P < 0.0001. HD vs PCS-CFS, *P = 0.0191. HD vs SS, ***P = 0.0008. HD vs MS, 
**P = 0.0087. D. GSEA Reactome analysis of the immune proteome identified enhanced extracellular matrix organization in ME/CFS patients compared to healthy 
controls. 
E. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of biological processes in the immune proteome identified a reduced defense response to bacterial pathogens in PCS-CFS patients 
compared with ME/CFS patients. 
F-I. GSEA Reactome analysis of the immune proteome identified increased hemostasis (F), platelet activation and signalling (G), response to elevated platelet-derived 
cytosolic Ca+2 (H), formation of fibrin clot (I) in PCS-CFS patients compared to ME/CFS patients.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
11 

including redox regulation, stress adaptation, angiogenesis, and re­
sponses to shear stress. Mitochondrial alterations could block these 
adaptive mechanisms, making endothelial cells unable to respond to 
increased metabolic demand (e.g., during exertion) and, in turn, driving 
PEM-like physiology.
Immune complex proteomics specifically isolates antibody-bound 
proteins, enriching for antigens, autoantigens, and immune mediators. 
While plasma proteomics provides a broader overview of circulating 
proteins, immune complex proteomics offers a more targeted and 
enriched assay for studying autoimmune diseases, where immune ac­
tivity plays a dominant role in disease progression and treatment out­
comes (Ohyama et al., 2015). Our immune proteome analysis revealed 
specific changes in the immune complex of ME/CFS patients compared 
to healthy controls and other disease controls, which may be relevant to 
many of ME/CFS's clinical features. We observed increased SPEG protein 
amounts within the immune complex of ME/CFS patients (Fig. 6C and 
D), suggesting the presence of autoantibodies against SPEG in ME/CFS. 
SPEG are muscle-expressed protein kinases. They play an essential role 
in muscle differentiation and maintenance (Hsieh et al., 2000). Loss of 
SPEG results in structural muscle defects, including mislocalization of 
focal adhesion proteins and abnormal calcium handling, which could 
potentially contribute to the pathophysiology in ME/CFS (Luo et al., 
2021). SPEG is mostly intracellular, found in cardiac and skeletal muscle 
cells (Hsieh et al., 2000). It is unlikely to be found in significant amounts 
in serum samples. However, in the event of muscle or cardiac injury, 
SPEG may be released into the serum (Martinez-Amat et al., 2005). We 
demonstrated a decreased presence of VWF proteins within the immune 
complexes of ME/CFS and concurrently validated their concurrent in­
crease in serum. VWF is primarily involved in hemostasis by mediating 
platelet adhesion and stabilizing coagulation Factor VIII, thereby initi­
ating clot formation (Federici, 2011). Additionally, VWF binds to C1q, 
reducing phagocytosis and pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion by 
macrophages (Donat et al., 2019). Studies have shown that VWF plays a 
role in regulating blood vessel formation and in vascular dysregulation 
(Randi and Laffan, 2017). In ME/CFS, dysfunction in these processes has 
been reported (van Campen et al., 2023). We detected reduced levels of 
several key proteins, including AZU1, ARG1, ZNF185, and LYZ, within 
the immune complexes of all three disease groups (Fig. 6C), suggesting a 
potential common role of IgGs in immune dysfunction and 
autoimmunity.
Our immune proteome analysis revealed several significant alter­
ations in pathways and biological processes. Only one significant 
alteration (extracellular matrix (ECM) organization) was predicted in 
ME/CFS patients through GSEA Reactome analysis (Fig. 7A). In a pre­
vious study, we demonstrated a significantly elevated serum fibronectin 
(FN1) level in both ME/CFS and post-COVID patients, but not in MS 
patients (Liu et al., 2023). In this study, FN1 was detected at lower levels 
in the immune complexes of a subset of patients. Alterations in ECM can 
lead to neuroinflammation (Sorokin, 2010), vascular dysfunction 
(Zhang et al., 2025), mitochondrial dysfunction (Zhang et al., 2024), 
fibrosis, and tissue stiffness (Herrera et al., 2018; He et al., 2024). The 
ECM is essential in maintaining vascular integrity and permeability. 
Dysregulation of the ECM could lead to capillary leakage, inadequate 
tissue perfusion, and altered mechanotransduction signaling in endo­
thelial cells, resulting in orthostatic intolerance, postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome (POTS), and other signs of microvascular dysre­
gulation commonly observed in ME/CFS patients. The ECM may act as a 
regulatory interface among the immune, nervous, and vascular systems 
in ME/CFS. Aberrant ECM remodeling could be a downstream effect of 
chronic inflammation, infection, or autoimmunity, and in turn, perpet­
uates the disease cycle. We did not observe similar pathway enrichments 
for PCS-CFS patients. However, several key differences were predicted 
between ME/CFS and PCS-CFS groups, including lower antibacterial 
defense, increased hemostasis, platelet activation and signaling, and 
fibrin clot formation (Fig. 7B–F). These pathways were enriched in the 
PCS-CFS groups compared to the ME/CFS group. All these processes are 
altered in post-COVID patients and have been an intense topic of study 
recently (Davis et al., 2023). Our results demonstrate the potential for 
developing disease markers based on the proteome of immune com­
plexes. However, more data and in-depth studies are required to validate 
some of these markers.
SARS-CoV-2 infection-induced ME/CFS (PCS-CFS) patients share 
clinical features with ME/CFS patients with unknown etiology. Our 
study offers a biological perspective for comparing various molecular 
aspects of these two conditions. While IgG-induced mitochondrial 
fragmentation and alteration in energetics were more prominent in post- 
infectious ME/CFS patients, IgG-induced alterations in inflammation- 
associated cytokines were prominent in PCS-CFS patients. IgG prote­
omics also showed distinct signatures within the immune complex of 
these two groups. We hypothesize that PCS-CFS patients represent an 
early stage of ME/CFS, where inflammation dominates clinical out­
comes, whereas ME/CFS patients represent the chronic nature of the 
disease, characterized by hypometabolism and consequent metabolic 
alterations that influence clinical presentation. In summary, our data 
provide a mechanistic basis for considering therapeutic strategies tar­
geting autoantibody-mediated pathology.
4. Methods
4.1. Experimental methods
Details of key resources are provided in the form of a table within 
Supplementary methods.
4.1.1. Patient recruitment and serum collection
Postinfectious ME/CFS, including post-COVID ME/CFS (PCS-CFS) 
patients, relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, and 
gender- and age-matched healthy controls, were recruited at the 
outpatient clinic of the Charit´e Universit¨atsmedizin, Berlin, between 
2020 and 2023. The diagnosis of ME/CFS was based on the 2003 Ca­
nadian Consensus Criteria and on the exclusion of other medical or 
neurological diseases that may cause fatigue through a comprehensive 
clinical and laboratory evaluation. MS patients have been suffering from 
fatigue relevant to everyday life and have to be free from relapses as well 
as from steroid treatment for at least 6 months. Biosamples of ME/CFS 
patients and healthy controls were collected by the group of Prof. 
Scheibenbogen, and biosamples of MS patients were collected by the 
group of Prof. Paul. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of 
Charit´e 
Universit¨atsmedizin 
Berlin 
(EA2/067/20; 
EA2_066_22; 
EA4_174_22) in accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its 
subsequent amendments, as well as by the Medizinische Ethikkommis­
sion of JMU, Würzburg (83/23). A total of 21 serum samples from pa­
tients diagnosed with systemic sclerosis were collected by the group of 
Prof. Riemekasten at the Clinic for Rheumatology and Clinical Immu­
nology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany, as 
part of the same approved study. These samples were only used for 
potential biomarker validation. All donors gave informed consent. 
Whole blood samples from each subject were allowed to clot at room 
temperature, then centrifuged at 2000×g for 10 min. The serum was 
stored in aliquots at −80 ◦C. Patient demographic is presented in Sup­
plementary Table 1.
4.1.2. Cell culture
U2-OS (HTB-96) cells were purchased from ATCC, and HUVEC- 
TERT2 cells (CHT-006-0008) were purchased from Evercyte, Austria. 
Human foreskin fibroblast cells (HFF-TERT) were kindly provided by 
Prof. Michael Weekes (Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Uni­
versity of Cambridge, UK). U2-OS and HFF-TERT cells were grown in 
McCoy's 5A (Gibco, 16600082) and DMEM media (Gibco, 11965092), 
respectively, supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% fetal bovine 
serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich, S0615) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin 
(Gibco, 15140122). HUVEC-TERT2 cells were grown in EBM basal 
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
12 

medium (Lonza, Cat#CC-3121) supplemented with Components of EGM 
SingleQuot Kit (Lonza, Cat# CC-4133: BBE, hEGF, hydrocortisone, 
ascorbic acid), 10% FBS, and 20 μg/ml G418. All cell lines were cultured 
at 37 ◦C with 5% CO2. Cells carrying stable GFP expression in mito­
chondria were developed as described previously (Hennig et al., 2022). 
Cells 
stably 
expressing 
GFP 
were 
created 
by 
cloning 
the 
mitochondrial-targeted GFP into pLVTHM vector backbone and trans­
ducing target cells with the lentivirus as mentioned before (50). All cell 
lines were frequently tested for Mycoplasma contamination and, where 
necessary, authenticated by sequencing.
4.1.3. Immunoglobulin purification
150 μl Protein G Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (#17061801, Cytiva) was 
loaded onto Poly-Prep Chromatography Columns (#731-1550, BIO- 
RAD). After washing the beads with PBS, 500 μL of serum sample was 
loaded and passed through the column three times, which was followed 
by three washes with PBS. Protein G-bound serum IgG was eluted by 
Glycine pH 2.7 and then neutralised with 1M Tris-HCl pH 8.0. IgG elute 
was dialyzed against PBS in Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Devices 
(#88404, Thermo Fisher Scientific). IgG concentration was measured by 
Easy-Titer Human IgG (H + L) Assay Kit (#23310, Thermo Fisher 
Scientific).
4.1.4. Fab fragments purification
Fab fragments of immunoglobulin G were purified using the Pierce 
Fab Micro Preparation Kit (#44685, Thermo Fisher Scientific), accord­
ing to the manufacturer's protocol. Fab fragments and flow-through 
containing digested Fc fragments were dialyzed against PBS in Slide- 
A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Devices (#88401, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
The concentrations of these fragments were quantified using a Nano­
Drop™ 2000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
4.1.5. IgG exposure in cell culture
U2-OS or HUVEC-TERT2 cells carrying soluble mitoGFP were seeded 
on 6-well plates and cultured overnight. Cell culture medium was 
replaced by fresh medium containing 1 μg/ml serum IgG or 0.5 μg/ml 
Fab fragments or flow-through, allowing cells to be exposed to serum- 
derived IgG, Fab fragments, or flow-through containing Fc fragments. 
Cells were collected after 16 h and 36 h for Western blot or immuno­
fluorescence experiments.
4.1.6. Fc receptor blocking assay
One hour prior to IgG exposure, the cell culture medium was 
replaced with fresh medium containing (20 μL) Azide Free Fc Receptor 
Blocker (#NB335, Innovex Biosciences). Following incubation, an equal 
volume of culture medium containing 2 μg/mL serum IgG was added to 
each well.
4.1.7. Immunofluorescence microscopy
Cells were seeded in 12-well plates on glass coverslips overnight and 
exposed to IgG. Cells were washed in PBS and fixed with 4% para­
formaldehyde for 30 min. After washing, the cells were permeabilized 
with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min and blocked with 10% FCS in 
PBS for 1 h. Cells were then incubated for 1 h with Anti-Human IgG (H +
L) CF594 (#SAB4600097, Sigma-Aldrich) in 2% FCS-PBS and washed 3 
times in PBS. DAPI was used for staining cell nuclei. When GFP mito­
chondria and DAPI are the only channels required, the DAPI staining 
was followed directly after fixation. Samples were mounted onto slides 
using ProLong Glass Antifade Mountant with NucBlue Stain (#P36981, 
Invitrogen). Samples were analyzed on a confocal microscope (LSM 510 
Meta, Carl Zeiss AG).
4.1.8. Average mitochondrial surface area and mitochondrial number 
analysis
Software and a modified algorithm for mitochondrial size and 
number measurement were previously described by us in detail (Hennig 
et al., 2022; Chowdhury et al., 2017). All image-processing and analysis 
steps were performed using Fiji (Schindelin et al., 2012).
4.1.9. Immunoblotting
Immunoblotting was carried out as described before (Gulve et al., 
2016; Prusty et al., 2018) using antibodies: Drp1 antibody (#sc-101270, 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology), Mfn1 antibody (#sc-166644, Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology), Mfn2 antibody (#sc-515647, Santa Cruz Biotech­
nology), PLD6 antibody (#ab237612, Abcam), FAM73A Antibody 
(#PA553611, Invitrogen), p53 antibody (#sc-126, Santa Cruz Biotech­
nology), TOMM20 antibody (#sc-17764, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 
TIMM23 antibody (#sc-514463, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), LC3β 
antibody (#sc-376404, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Equal protein 
loading was confirmed by the following antibodies: Actin antibody 
(#sc-8432, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and Vinculin antibody 
(#sc-73614, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). All primary antibodies were 
used at a dilution of 1:1000 to 1:3000. HRP-conjugated secondary an­
tibodies, which are HRP Rabbit Anti-Human IgG (whole molecule) 
(#A8792, Sigma-Aldrich), Goat Anti-Human IgG (Fc specific) HRP 
(#A0170, 
Sigma-Aldrich), 
Goat 
Anti-Mouse 
IgG 
Antibody, 
HRP-conjugate (#12-348, Sigma-Aldrich), and Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG 
Antibody, HRP-conjugate (#12-349, Sigma-Aldrich), were used at a 
dilution of 1:2000 to 1:10,000.
1 μL of HUVEC protein lysates after IgG exposure were run in parallel 
on an automated capillary Simple Western (JESS from Bio-Techne) for 
proper quantification. Simple Western was performed according to the 
manufacturer's protocol using 12-230 kDa (#SM-W004, Bio-Techne) or 
2-40 kDa (#SM-W004, Bio-Techne) separation modules with chemilu­
minescent Anti-Mouse (#DM-002, Bio-Techne), Anti-Rabbit (#DM-001, 
Bio-Techne) or fluorescent Anti-Mouse (#DM-009, Bio-Techne), Anti- 
Rabbit (#DM-007, Bio-Techne) detection modules, and results were 
analyzed using Compass software (version 6.3.0). Assays were per­
formed using antibodies: Mitofilin antibody (#ab245764, Abcam), Drp1 
antibody (#sc-101270, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), TIMM23 (#sc- 
514463, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), PLD6 antibody (#ab237612, 
Abcam), FAM73A (Miga1) Antibody (#PA553611, Invitrogen), LC3β 
antibody (#18725-1-AP, Proteintech), PINK1 antibody (#NB100-644, 
Novus Biologicals). Equal protein loading was confirmed by Vinculin 
antibody (#sc-73614, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). All primary anti­
bodies were used at a dilution of 1:50 to 1:500.
4.1.10. Seahorse assay extracellular flux analysis
Mitochondrial function was assessed using the Seahorse XF Cell Mito 
Stress Test on the XFe96 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Biosci­
ence). XFe96/XF pro cell culture microplates (#103793-100, Agilent) 
were pre-coated with 0.1% gelatin (#0646.1, Carl Roth) and seeded 
with 4000 HUVECs per well. After overnight incubation, cells were 
exposed to purified serum IgG for 16 h. All experimental conditions were 
performed in triplicate. On the day of the assay, the culture medium was 
replaced with Seahorse XF RPMI medium (#103576-100, Agilent), 
supplemented with 10 mM D-glucose (#G8769, Sigma Aldrich), 2 mM L- 
glutamine (#A2916801, Gibco), and 1 mM sodium pyruvate 
(#11360070, Gibco), and adjusted to pH 7.4. When required, 10 mM D- 
glucose was replaced to 10 mL D-Galactose (#G5388, Sigma Aldrich). 
Plates were incubated for 1 h at 37 ◦C in a non-CO2 incubator prior to 
measurement. The Mito Stress Test was conducted according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, baseline oxygen consumption rate 
(OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) were measured, fol­
lowed by sequential injections of 1.5 μM oligomycin (ATP synthase in­
hibitor), 1.0 μM FCCP (mitochondrial uncoupler), and 0.5 μM rotenone 
combined with 0.5 μM antimycin A (Complex I and III inhibitors, 
respectively). Each injection step included three measurement cycles, 
each comprising a mixing and a measuring phase. Following the Sea­
horse assay, cells were lysed in 0.1 M NaOH containing protease in­
hibitors and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Protein 
concentration was quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit 
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
13 

(#23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's 
protocol, for normalization of Seahorse assay data. Seahorse assay data 
were recorded, processed, and analyzed using software Wave (Agilent). 
Mito Stress Test reports were generated according to the Seahorse XF 
Cell Mito Stress Test Report Generator template. OCR and ECAR values 
were analyzed to calculate key mitochondrial parameters, including 
basal respiration, ATP-linked respiration, proton leak, maximal respi­
ration, spare respiratory capacity, and non-mitochondrial respiration. 
To quantify ATP production rates, the same Seahorse data set from the 
Mito Stress Test was reanalyzed using Seahorse XF Real-Time ATP Rate 
Assay Report Generator. OCR and ECAR values obtained before and 
after injection of oligomycin and rotenone/antimycin A were used to 
calculate mitochondrial ATP production, glycolytic ATP production, and 
total ATP production rates.
For experiments related to Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. S2A–S2B, 
we have separated ME/CFS patients into two arbitrary subgroups. This 
separation is based on the mitochondrial surface area quantification 
data shown in Fig. 2B. IgGs that induce strong mitochondrial fragmen­
tation show reduced average mitochondrial surface area. For the 
experimental results shown in Fig. 3A–B, we randomly selected 10 ME/ 
CFS patients from the group that exhibited a reduction in average 
mitochondrial surface area relative to the mean surface area of healthy 
controls. For the experimental results shown in Fig. S2A–S2B, we 
randomly selected 10 ME/CFS patients from the group that did not alter 
or increase mitochondrial surface area compared to healthy controls.
4.1.11. IgG-induced inflammation assay using human PBMCs
a. Experimental setup
Peripheral blood was obtained from an apparently healthy adult 
donor under the ethical approval of Riga Stradin¸ˇs University (RSU) 
Research Ethics Committee (2-P¯EK-4/784/2025). PBMCs were isolated 
by density gradient centrifugation using Histopaque-1077 (Sigma- 
Aldrich, Cat# 10771) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After 
centrifugation, the PBMC layer was collected, washed twice with sterile 
phosphate-buffered saline (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# D8537), and resus­
pended in complete RPMI 1640 medium (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat# 
22400-089) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated, filtered fetal 
bovine serum (FBS) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin.
Cells were seeded in flat-bottom 96-well plates (Sarstedt, Cat# 
83.1835.300) at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well in 200 μL of culture 
medium. Dialyzed IgG (final concentration: 50 μg/mL) from serum 
samples of healthy controls, patients with ME/CFS, PCS-CFS, or MS was 
added to the freshly isolated PBMCs immediately upon plating. Cells 
were incubated at 37 ◦C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 
for 48 h. Following incubation, culture supernatants were collected and 
centrifuged at 400×g for 5 min to remove cell debris. Concentrations of 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-α) were measured using commercially available enzyme- 
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (ThermoFisher Scientific: IL- 
6, Cat# 88-7066-88; IL-1β, Cat# 88-7346-88; TNF-α, Cat# 88-7261- 
88) following the manufacturer's protocols. Absorbance was measured 
at 450 nm using a microplate reader (ThermoFisher, Varioskan LUX), 
and cytokine concentrations were calculated from standard curves 
generated with recombinant standards provided in each kit. 
b. 
Multiplex 
bead-based 
assay 
for 
inflammatory 
marker 
measurements
The cell culture supernatant from PBMCs was centrifuged at 5000 g 
for 5 min to obtain a cell- and debris-free supernatant. TNF-α, IFNγ, IL-5, 
IL-10, IL-6, IL-1β, IFNα2, sCD40L, TGFα, and TNF-α levels in cell culture 
supernatants were quantified using the Milliplex MAP Human Cytokine, 
Chemokine, and Growth Factor Panel A Magnetic Bead Panel kit 
(HCYTA-60K, Millipore) according to the manufacturer's protocol. 
Briefly, the samples were combined with marker-specific antibody- 
coupled magnetic beads in a 96-well plate and incubated overnight at 
4 ◦C. Following incubation, the plate was washed on a magnet, followed 
by incubations with biotinylated detection antibodies and streptavidin- 
phycoerythrin. Finally, the plate was washed on a magnet, and beads 
were resuspended in xMAP Sheath Fluid Plus (40-50021, Luminex). The 
plate was read using the Luminex 200 instrument and xPONENT soft­
ware, and the results were analyzed using GraphPad Prism to construct a 
7-point standard curve using a 5-parameter logistic curve-fitting 
method. Each plate included a background and two quality controls. 
Before reading the plate, the Luminex 200 instrument was calibrated 
and verified using the Luminex 100/200 Calibration and Performance 
Verifications kits (LX2R-CAL-K25 and LX2R-PVER-K25, Luminex). Each 
IgG was tested in two separate biological replicates per PBMC sample. 
Two such independent experiments were carried out using separate 
donor-derived PBMCs. The obtained results were combined, and the 
average values for each cytokine were used.
4.1.12. Mass spectrometry
a. Mass spectrometry sample preparation
A fraction of serum IgG-bound protein G beads from IgG purification 
was eluted by NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4X) (#NP0007, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific). The eluates were sent for mass spectrometry. 
b. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3)
Samples were processed using an adapted SP3 protocol (Hughes 
et al., 2019). Briefly, 200 μl reconstitution solution was added to each 
sample prepared in 50 μl NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Life Technolo­
gies). Reduction was performed using 5 mM DTT, followed by alkylation 
with 20 mM iodoacetamide. 10 mM additional DTT was used for 
quenching. Equal volumes of two types of Sera-Mag Speed Beads 
(Cytiva, #45152101010250 and #65152105050250) were combined, 
washed with water, and 10 μL of the bead mix was added to each sample. 
260 μl 100% ethanol was added, and samples were incubated for 5 min 
at 24 ◦C, 1000 rpm. Beads were captured on a magnetic rack for 2 min, 
and the supernatant was removed. Beads were washed twice with 200 μl 
of 80% ethanol (Chromasolv, Sigma) and once with 1000 μl of 80% 
ethanol. Digestion was performed on beads with 0.25 μg Trypsin (Gold, 
Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) and 0.25 μg Lys-C (Wako) in 100 μl 
100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 ◦C overnight. Peptides were 
desalted using C-18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Each Stage Tip 
was prepared using three C-18 Empore SPE Discs (3 M) in a 200 μl 
pipette tip. Peptides were eluted with 60 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic 
acid, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf), and stored at −20 ◦C. 
Peptides were dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid prior to 
nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. 
c. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis
NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion 
(Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objec­
tive) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides 
were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm × 150 μm ID, PepSep) and 
separated on a capillary column (30 cm × 150 μm ID, PepSep) both 
packed with 1.9 μm C18 ReproSil and separated with a 120-min linear 
gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid and a flow 
rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the 
Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 30,000 
for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision 
energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a 
fixed cycle time of 3 s was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a 
repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 90 s; singly charged 
precursors were excluded from selection. The minimum signal threshold 
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
14 

for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with 
AGC a target value of 4 × 105 for MS scans and 5 × 104 for MS/MS scans. 
EASY-IC was used for internal calibration. 
d. Mass spectrometry data analysis
Raw mass spectrometry data files were analyzed with MaxQuant 
version 1.6.2.2 (Cox and Mann, 2008). A database search was performed 
using Andromeda, integrated into the version of MaxQuant used. The 
search was performed against the UniProt Human Reference Proteome 
database (Release, 2024_3, UP000005640, 82518 entries), the UniProt 
EBV database (Release, 2024_3, UP000272970, 55 entries), and the 
UniProt HHV-6A database (Release, 2024_3, UP000009295, 99 entries). 
Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. 
The search was performed with trypsin cleavage specificity, allowing up 
to 3 miscleavages. Protein identification was controlled by the 
false-discovery rate (FDR; <1% FDR at the protein and peptide spectrum 
match (PSM) levels). In addition to the MaxQuant default settings, the 
search was performed against the following variable modifications: 
Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln-to-pyro-Glu formation (N-terminal 
Gln), and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as a fixed 
modification. LFQ intensities were used for protein quantitation (Cox 
et al., 2014).
The raw MaxQuant output files revealed expression data for 783 
proteins. We focused on raw intensity values and label-free quantifica­
tion (LFQ) intensity values for further analysis. The data processing and 
analysis work consisted of 4 components: Data processing, Clustering 
and PCA, Differential expression analysis, and pathway enrichment 
analysis. The first step of data processing involved contaminant filtering, 
removing proteins with excessive missing values, imputing missing 
values, and applying a log transformation. We removed contaminants 
and low-quality proteins from the MaxQuant output data. Proteins 
filtered out included those with Potential contaminant value +, Reverse 
value +, and site value +. Locally developed Python code was used for 
this purpose. To remove proteins with excessive missing values, we 
removed proteins with raw intensity values equaling 0 for at least 70% 
of the samples within the group. Missing values were evaluated using 
plots generated with the Amelia (v1.8.1) R package's missmap (.) 
function, with default parameters. Imputation was performed on LFQ 
intensity data, although proteins with missing values were identified 
based on raw intensity. Specifically, when the raw intensity value for a 
protein was 0, it was considered a missing value; subsequently, the LFQ 
intensity was imputed. If samples with missing values exceeded 70% of 
all samples within a group, the LFQ intensity values were imputed to be 
0. If samples with missing values did not exceed 70% of all samples 
within a group, KNN imputation was performed. The scikit-learn 
(v0.23.2) Python package was invoked, using the KNNImputer func­
tion, which was applied with the neighbor number (k) set to the sample 
size for the group. Locally developed Python code was used to summa­
rize the results.
Log transformation (base 2) was performed for imputed LFQ in­
tensity values using locally developed Python code. Data were visualized 
using density distributions and box plots, generated with the Matplotlib 
Python package (version 3.7.5). Hierarchical clustering analysis was 
performed for all proteins using the pheatmap (version 1.0.12) R 
package. ggplot2 (v3.5.1) R package was used to generate clustering 
plots. PCA was performed using the gmodels R package (version 2.19.1). 
ggplot2 (v3.5.1) and scatterplot3d (v0.3.44) R packages were used to 
generate 2D and 3D PCA plots, respectively.
Differential expression analysis was performed using the limma 
(version 3.62.1) R package. The volcano plot was generated using 
ggplot2 (v3.5.1) R packages. Heatmaps of differentially expressed pro­
teins were generated using the pheatmap (version 1.0.12) R package. 
GSEA was performed using the fgsea (version 1.32.2) and clusterProfiler 
(version 4.14.4) packages. An adjusted P-value <0.05 was used to select 
significant enrichment pathways. Pathway enrichment analysis was 
carried out to identify enriched GO terms among up- and down- 
regulated proteins using the DAVID (v2023q4) web tools (https://davi 
dbioinformatics.nih.gov/). A FDR cut-off of 0.05 was adopted to select 
significant pathways. ggplot2 (v3.5.1) R package was used to generate 
bubble plots. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using Gene Ontology 
(GO) terms, including Biological Process (BP), Cellular Component (CC), 
and Molecular Function (MF), as well as using the Reactome dataset, for 
the six pair-wise comparisons between the four groups of samples. Four 
GSEA sets were conducted for each of the 6 pairwise comparisons, for a 
total of 24 sets of analysis attempted. 
e. Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
ELISA was performed using the following kits according to the 
manufacturers’ protocols: Human Ficolin-2 ELISA Kit (#EH192RB, 
Invitrogen), Transferrin ELISA Kit (#EHTF, Invitrogen), Human Pre­
kallikrein 1B ELISA Kit (#ab202405, Abcam), Human Azurocidin/ 
CAP37 ELISA Kit (#EH39RB, Invitrogen) and Human von Willebrand 
Factor (VWF) ELISA Kit (#EHVWF, Invitrogen).
4.1.13. Antigen microarray pilot study
a. Antigen Microarray experimental setup
Microarray studies for IgG and IgM against autoantigens were car­
ried out in collaboration with Creative Biolabs, USA. Frozen serum 
samples without a prior freeze-thaw cycle were used for the assay. Each 
serum was digested with DNase I for 30 min at room temperature on a 
shaker. For the control, no serum sample was added. Slides carrying 
antigens against 120 autoantigens (for details of the antigens, please see 
Supplementary Table 2) were blocked in 100 μL blocking buffer at room 
temperature for 30 min on a shaker. Afterwards, the slides were washed 
twice with PBST, each for 5 min. 90 μl PBST was added to each serum 
sample or control mix. Diluted samples were added to each well of the 
slide (100 μl each) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h on a 
shaker. Slides were washed with 100 μl PBST/well for 5 min on the 
shaker. Subsequently, slides were washed with blocking buffer 100 μl/ 
each well for 5 min on a shaker and then with PBST 100 μl/each well) for 
5 min on a shaker. Anti-human IgM secondary antibody was diluted to 
1:1000 in PBST, and 100 μl of secondary antibody was added to each 
well. Slides were incubated at room temperature for 1 h on the shaker, 
then washed 3 times with 100 μL PBST per well, 5 min on the shaker. 
Slides were then washed twice each: first with 45 ml PBS in a 50 ml tube 
for 5 min on the shaker, then with 45 ml nuclease-free water in a 50 ml 
tube for 5 min on the shaker. GenePix 4000B microarray systems were 
used to scan the slide. The 532 nm channel was used to scan Cy3 fluo­
rescence, and the 635 nm channel was used to scan Alexa Fluor-647 
fluorescence. 
b. Microarray data analysis
Each chip had serially diluted anti-IgM and IgM as positive controls 
to monitor the experimental process, and PBS was used as a negative 
control. The obtained chip image was read using the LuxScan 3.0 soft­
ware to extract the original data. Statistical tests were then carried out 
on the chip background and on the signal intensities of the positive and 
negative control sites. The results showed that the Ig control signal value 
was higher and uniform across different samples. In addition, the PBS 
anti-Ig control and background signal values were both low, meeting the 
quality control requirements. The chip of the test sample was scanned 
with the LuxScan 10K-B scanner. The autoantigen microarray chip/ 
Pathogen-associated antigen microarray chip had 256 points in total. 
After removing the 8 anti-IgM and 8 Ig control points, 240 data points 
were obtained. Each protein on the chip was present as two technical 
repetitions, representing 120 autoantigens. The chip is read by LuxScan 
3.0 software to obtain the original data, including foreground signal (F 
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
15 

Median), background signal (B Median), and so on. Foreground Median, 
Background Median columns were extracted from the.LSR file. The 
fluorescence intensity value of each site was calculated by the formula: 
Net Fluorescence Intensity (NFI) Value = (Foreground Median - Back­
ground Median); SNR = (Foreground Median - Background Median)/SD 
(Background). SNR was used to filter unreasonable data. The net fluo­
rescence value was set as SNR <0.05 and SNR to 0.001. The net fluo­
rescence value was calculated after subtracting the blank control. The 
NFI and SNR of the following unreasonable situations were set to 0.001. 
NFI<20 and SNR>5; SNR<0.05 and NFI>20; NFI<0.05. RLM Normal­
ization was used to normalize the NFI and calculate the effect values of 
different blocks and slides. For the microarray data clustering and 
multivariate analysis, first a log transformation was applied, and then 
‘pheatmap’ in the R package was used with Ward.D2 clustering to 
perform the cluster analysis. 
c. Machine learning and Multivariate analysis of autoantigen IgM 
microarray data
Multivariate analysis of patient clusters based on distance metrics 
derived from IgM antibody levels against a panel of autoantigens. Col­
umns with zero variation (constant values) were removed. Log- 
transformed scaled data showing relative differences between patients 
was used because the data in its raw form had different orders of 
magnitude, making analysis and comparison difficult. The analysis was 
performed using the R package “pheatmap” using the Ward.D2 clus­
tering method and Euclidean distances.
A Random Forest classifier using the R package randomForest was fit 
to predict ME/CFS as the outcome on two types of data: raw and log- 
scaled. The purpose of this fit was to provide a rapid screen of vari­
ables for further analysis. The Variable Importance Plot for the fits was 
plotted. The top 10 candidates from the Log Variable Importance Plots 
were selected for Principal Component Analysis (PCA), a statistical 
methodology for dimension reduction. PCA was performed using the R 
packages stats (prcomp) and FactoMineR.
4.1.14. Other statistical analysis
All statistical calculations were performed using GraphPad Prism 
10.0. Error bars displayed on graphs represent the means ± SD of three 
or more independent replicates of an experiment. Statistical significance 
was calculated separately for each experiment and is described within 
individual figure legends. For image analysis, three or more biological 
replicates per sample condition were used to generate the represented 
data. The results were considered significant at P ≤0.05.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zheng Liu: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project 
administration, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing. Claudia Hollmann: Investigation, Meth­
odology. Sharada Kalanidhi: Data curation, Formal analysis, Method­
ology. Stephanie Lamer: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation. 
Andreas Schlosser: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology. Emils 
Edgars Basens: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology. Georgy 
Nikolayshvili: Investigation, Methodology. Liba Sokolovska: Investi­
gation, Methodology. Gabriela Riemekasten: Resources. Rebekka 
Rust: Resources. Judith Bellmann-Strobl: Resources. Friedemann 
Paul: Resources. Robert K. Naviaux: Conceptualization, Methodology, 
Supervision. Zaiga Nora-Krukle: Resources. Franziska Sotzny: Re­
sources. Carmen Scheibenbogen: Resources. Bhupesh K. Prusty: 
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Supervision, 
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should 
be directed to Bhupesh K Prusty (bhupesh.prusty@rsu.lv).
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Charit´e Uni­
versit¨atsmedizin Berlin (EA2/067/20; EA2_066_22; EA4_174_22) in 
accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent 
amendments, as well as by the Medizinische Ethikkommission of JMU, 
Würzburg (83/23). All donors gave informed consent.
Materials availability
This study did not generate new, unique reagents.
Data and code availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data for the serum immuno­
globulin proteome study have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange 
Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier 
PXD065439. The raw experimental data are submitted to the Mendley 
database (doi: 10.17632/ph4mbrh26h.1).
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported 
in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
Funding
This work was supported by grants from ME Research UK, with the 
financial support of the Gordon Parish Charitable Trust (to BKP), the 
Amar Foundation, USA (to BKP), and the Bundesministerium für Bil­
dung und Forschung (BMBF) (grant number 01EJ2204E) (to BKP). ZL 
was supported by a fellowship from Bundesverband für ME/CFS - Fati­
gatio e.V.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
We thank the Core Unit for Confocal Microscopy and Flow 
Cytometry-Based Cell Sorting at the IZKF Würzburg for their support of 
this study. We also thank Vera Kozjak-Pavlovic (Biocenter, University of 
Würzburg) for sharing a custom macro for mitochondrial analysis. We 
appreciate AccuraScience, USA, for their assistance with mass spec­
trometry data analysis and Dr. Archana Prusty for her help in estab­
lishing the in-house IgG purification pipeline.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bbih.2026.101187.
References
Bertinat, R., et al., 2022. Decreased NO production in endothelial cells exposed to plasma 
from ME/CFS patients. Vascul Pharmacol 143, 106953.
Bhatti, J.S., Bhatti, G.K., Reddy, P.H., 2017. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative 
stress in metabolic disorders - a step towards mitochondria based therapeutic 
strategies. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 1863, 1066–1077.
Brown, A., Jason, L.A., 2020. Meta-analysis investigating post-exertional malaise 
between patients and controls. J. Health Psychol. 25, 2053–2071.
Bynke, A., et al., 2020. Autoantibodies to beta-adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic 
receptors in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME) patients - a validation study in plasma 
and cerebrospinal fluid from two Swedish cohorts. Brain Behav Immun Health 7, 
100107.
Chen, H.-J., et al., 2024. Transfer of IgG from long COVID patients induces 
symptomology in mice. bioRxiv 2024.2005.2030, 596590.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
16 

Chowdhury, S.R., et al., 2017. Chlamydia preserves the mitochondrial network necessary 
for replication via microRNA-dependent inhibition of fission. J. Cell Biol. 216, 
1071–1089.
Cox, J., Mann, M., 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, 
individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein 
quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372.
Cox, J., et al., 2014. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed 
normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. 
Proteomics 13, 2513–2526.
Cvejic, E., Birch, R.C., Vollmer-Conna, U., 2016. Cognitive dysfunction in chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a review of recent evidence. Curr. Rheumatol. Rep. 18, 24.
Davis, H.E., McCorkell, L., Vogel, J.M., Topol, E.J., 2023. Long COVID: major findings, 
mechanisms and recommendations. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 21, 133–146.
Donat, C., Thanei, S., Trendelenburg, M., 2019. Binding of von Willebrand Factor to 
Complement C1q Decreases the Phagocytosis of Cholesterol Crystals and Subsequent 
IL-1 Secretion in Macrophages. Front. Immunol. 10, 2712.
Esfandyarpour, R., Kashi, A., Nemat-Gorgani, M., Wilhelmy, J., Davis, R.W., 2019. 
A nanoelectronics-blood-based diagnostic biomarker for myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 116, 10250–10257.
Federici, A.B., 2011. The von Willebrand factor from basic mechanisms to clinical 
practice. Blood Transfus 9 (Suppl. 2), s1–s2.
Fluge, O., et al., 2016. Metabolic profiling indicates impaired pyruvate dehydrogenase 
function in myalgic encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight 1, 
e89376.
Germain, A., Levine, S.M., Hanson, M.R., 2021. In-Depth analysis of the plasma proteome 
in ME/CFS exposes disrupted ephrin-eph and immune System signaling. Proteomes 
9.
Geyer, P.E., Holdt, L.M., Teupser, D., Mann, M., 2017. Revisiting biomarker discovery by 
plasma proteomics. Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 942.
Gulve, N., et al., 2016. Anti-herpesviral effects of a novel broad range anti-microbial 
quaternary ammonium silane, K21. Antivir. Res. 131, 166–173.
Haffke, M., et al., 2022. Endothelial dysfunction and altered endothelial biomarkers in 
patients with post-COVID-19 syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). 
J. Transl. Med. 20, 138.
Hartwig, J., et al., 2020. IgG stimulated β2 adrenergic receptor activation is attenuated in 
patients with ME/CFS. Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 3, 100047.
He, J., Cheng, X., Fang, B., Shan, S., Li, Q., 2024. Mechanical stiffness promotes skin 
fibrosis via Piezo1-Wnt2/Wnt11-CCL24 positive feedback loop. Cell Death Dis. 15, 
84.
Hennig, T., et al., 2022. Selective inhibition of miRNA processing by a herpesvirus- 
encoded miRNA. Nature 605, 539–544.
Herrera, J., Henke, C.A., Bitterman, P.B., 2018. Extracellular matrix as a driver of 
progressive fibrosis. J. Clin. Investig. 128, 45–53.
Hsieh, C.M., et al., 2000. Striated muscle preferentially expressed genes alpha and beta 
are two serine/threonine protein kinases derived from the same gene as the aortic 
preferentially expressed gene-1. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 36966–36973.
Hu, Y., et al., 2012. K-ras(G12V) transformation leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and 
a metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis. Cell Res. 22, 
399–412.
Hughes, C.S., et al., 2019. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for 
proteomics experiments. Nat. Protoc. 14, 68–85.
Kadaja, L., et al., 2004. IgG from patients with liver diseases inhibit mitochondrial 
respiration in permeabilized oxidative muscle cells: impaired function of 
intracellular energetic units? Mol. Cell. Biochem. 256–257, 291–303.
Klein, R., Berg, P.A., 1990. Demonstration of "naturally occurring mitochondrial 
antibodies" in family members of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. Hepatology 
12, 335–341.
Lawson, N., Hsieh, C.H., March, D., Wang, X., 2016. Elevated energy production in 
chronic fatigue syndrome patients. J. Nat. Sci. 2.
Liu, Z., et al., 2023. Increased circulating fibronectin, depletion of natural IgM and 
heightened EBV, HSV-1 reactivation in ME/CFS and long COVID. medRxiv.
Loebel, M., et al., 2016. Antibodies to beta adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic 
receptors in patients with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Brain Behav. Immun. 52, 
32–39.
Luo, S., et al., 2021. SPEG binds with desmin and its deficiency causes defects in triad 
and focal adhesion proteins. Hum. Mol. Genet. 29, 3882–3891.
Mandarano, A.H., et al., 2020. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
patients exhibit altered T cell metabolism and cytokine associations. J. Clin. Investig. 
130, 1491–1505.
Marchi, S., Guilbaud, E., Tait, S.W.G., Yamazaki, T., Galluzzi, L., 2023. Mitochondrial 
control of inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 23, 159–173.
Martinez-Amat, A., et al., 2005. Release of alpha-actin into serum after skeletal muscle 
damage. Br. J. Sports Med. 39, 830–834.
Mercier-Letondal, P., Marton, C., Godet, Y., Galaine, J., 2021. Validation of a method 
evaluating T cell metabolic potential in compliance with ICH Q2 (R1). J. Transl. 
Med. 19, 21.
Milivojevic, M., et al., 2020. Plasma proteomic profiling suggests an association between 
antigen driven clonal B cell expansion and ME/CFS. PLoS One 15, e0236148.
Myhill, S., Booth, N.E., McLaren-Howard, J., 2009. Chronic fatigue syndrome and 
mitochondrial dysfunction. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Med. 2, 1–16.
Ohyama, K., et al., 2015. Proteomic profiling of antigens in circulating immune 
complexes associated with each of seven autoimmune diseases. Clin. Biochem. 48, 
181–185.
Prusty, B.K., Chowdhury, S.R., Gulve, N., Rudel, T., 2018. Peptidase inhibitor 15 (PI15) 
regulates chlamydial CPAF activity. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 8, 183.
Randi, A.M., Laffan, M.A., 2017. Von Willebrand factor and angiogenesis: basic and 
applied issues. J Thromb Haemost 15, 13–20.
Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., Mann, M., 2003. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix- 
assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample 
pretreatment in proteomics. Anal. Chem. 75, 663–670.
Sandvik, M.K., et al., 2023. Endothelial dysfunction in ME/CFS patients. PLoS One 18, 
e0280942.
Santos Guedes de Sa, K., et al., 2024. A causal link between autoantibodies and 
neurological symptoms in long COVID. medRxiv.
Scheibenbogen, C., et al., 2018. Immunoadsorption to remove ss2 adrenergic receptor 
antibodies in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome CFS/ME. PLoS One 13, e0193672.
Schindelin, J., et al., 2012. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. 
Nat. Methods 9, 676–682.
Schreiner, P., et al., 2020. Human Herpesvirus-6 reactivation, mitochondrial 
fragmentation, and the coordination of antiviral and metabolic phenotypes in 
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic fatigue syndrome. Immunohorizons 4, 201–215.
Shankar, V., et al., 2025. Oxidative stress is a shared characteristic of ME/CFS and long 
COVID. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 122, e2426564122.
Sorokin, L., 2010. The impact of the extracellular matrix on inflammation. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 10, 712–723.
Sotzny, F., et al., 2018. Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome - Evidence 
for an autoimmune disease. Autoimmun. Rev. 17, 601–609.
Sotzny, F., et al., 2022. Dysregulated autoantibodies targeting vaso- and 
immunoregulatory receptors in Post COVID Syndrome correlate with symptom 
severity. Front. Immunol. 13, 981532.
van Campen, C., Rowe, P.C., Visser, F.C., 2023. Worsening symptoms is associated with 
larger cerebral blood flow abnormalities during tilt-testing in Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Medicina (Kaunas) 59.
Vogelpoel, L.T., et al., 2014. Fc gamma receptor-TLR cross-talk elicits pro-inflammatory 
cytokine production by human M2 macrophages. Nat. Commun. 5, 5444.
Wang, N., Wang, X., Lan, B., Gao, Y., Cai, Y., 2025. DRP1, fission and apoptosis. Cell 
Death Discov. 11, 150.
Ward, B., et al., 2024. Deep plasma proteomics with data-independent acquisition: 
clinical Study protocol optimization with a COVID-19 cohort. J. Proteome Res. 23, 
3806–3822.
Yepez, V.A., et al., 2018. OCR-Stats: robust estimation and statistical testing of 
mitochondrial respiration activities using Seahorse XF Analyzer. PLoS One 13, 
e0199938.
Zhang, H., et al., 2024. The extracellular matrix integrates mitochondrial homeostasis. 
Cell 187, 4289–4304 e4226.
Zhang, L., Zhou, J., Kong, W., 2025. Extracellular matrix in vascular homeostasis and 
disease. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 22, 333–353.
Zinn, M.A., Jason, L.A., 2021. Cortical autonomic network connectivity predicts 
symptoms in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Int. J. 
Psychophysiol. 170, 89–101.
Z. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 52 (2026) 101187 
17 
