Subclinical neurovascular and immune correlates of post-COVID-19 
syndrome detected by retinal imaging
Michael Wunderle a,*
, Rebecca Wicklein b, Andrea Ribeiro a, Javier Carbajo-Lozoya a,  
Anna W¨ohnl a, Johanna Negele a, Veronika Kesseler a, Anna Wild b, Samuel Niedermayer a,  
Isabelle Lethen a, Maciej Lech c, Martin J. Menten d,e, Linus Kreitner d,  
Christoph Schmaderer a,f,g,1, Timon Wallraven a,**,1
a TUM School of Medicine and Health, Department of Nephrology, TUM University Hospital, Technical University of Munich, Munich, 81675, Germany
b TUM School of Medicine and Health, Department of Neurology, TUM University Hospital, Technical University of Munich, Munich, 81675, Germany
c Medizinische Klinik Und Poliklinik IV, LMU University Hospital Munich, Ziemssenstraße 5, Munich, 80336, Germany
d Chair for AI in Healthcare and Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Germany
e BioMedIA, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
f German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Munich Partner Site, Munich, Germany
g Site Lead, VADYS-ME Research Program, TUM University Hospital, Munich, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Post-COVID-19 syndrome
Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
OCT angiography (OCTA)
Retinal biomarkers
Neuroinflammation
Microvascular dysfunction
A B S T R A C T
Background: Post-COVID-19 Syndrome (PCS) encompasses a range of persistent symptoms, including cognitive 
and autonomic disturbances, potentially linked to microvascular or neuroinflammatory mechanisms. Retinal 
imaging provides a non-invasive window into the central nervous system and vascular integrity. This study 
aimed to assess retinal structural and microvascular alterations in PCS patients and explore their relationship 
with symptom severity.
Methods: In this monocentric, cross-sectional, exploratory study, we performed Optical Coherence Tomography 
(OCT) and OCT Angiography (OCTA) in patients with PCS and a group of COVID-19 recovered individuals. 
Multiple circulating biomarkers reflecting endothelial dysfunction and chronic inflammation were measured. 
Associations with validated symptom scores (PCS Score, C19-YRS, PHQ-9, GAD-7) were evaluated.
Results: After adjusting for age and gender, no significant differences were observed in OCTA-derived vessel 
density (VD) or foveolar avascular zone (FAZ) between PCS patients and COVID-19-recovered controls. However, 
PCS patients exhibited significant thinning of the peripapillary retinal nerve fibre layer (pRNFL), ganglion cell 
inner plexiform layer (GCIP), and total macular volume (TMV). Lower values of these structural parameters were 
consistently observed in patients with higher symptom severity. Vascular parameters (VD and FAZ) were not 
related to clinical scores. Higher MCP-1 levels, a chemokine associated with chronic inflammation, were linked 
to lower inner nuclear layer and GCIP thickness.
Conclusion: Structural retinal alterations in PCS were associated with symptom burden and may reflect under­
lying neuroinflammatory or neurodegenerative processes. OCT parameters could serve as potential non-invasive 
biomarkers, warranting further investigation in longitudinal, multicenter studies.
1. Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has led to 
significant global health consequences. Although initially recognized as 
a respiratory illness, it has become evident that COVID-19 also affects 
the vascular system, leading to endothelial dysfunction (ED) and 
ongoing 
inflammation 
with 
implications 
for 
various 
organs 
* Corresponding author. Technical University of Munich, TUM University Hospital, Klinikum rechts der Isar Ismaninger Straße 22, 81675, Munich, Germany.
** Corresponding author. Technical University of Munich, TUM University Hospital, Klinikum rechts der Isar Ismaninger Straße 22, 81675, Munich, Germany.
E-mail addresses: Michael.Wunderle@mri.tum.de (M. Wunderle), Timon.Wallraven@mri.tum.de (T. Wallraven). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health
journal homepage: www.editorialmanager.com/bbih/default.aspx
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbih.2026.101315
Received 27 July 2025; Received in revised form 9 July 2026; Accepted 22 July 2026  
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
Available online 25 July 2026 
2666-3546/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

(Charfeddine et al., 2021; Kuchler et al., 2023a; Patrascu and Dumitru, 
2025). A subset of patients continues to experience persistent symptoms 
after recovering from the acute infection, a condition referred to as 
Post-COVID-19 syndrome (PCS) (NICE, 2021) or Long COVID (Soriano 
et al., 2022). Given the typical symptoms of fatigue, dyspnea, auto­
nomic dysfunction, neurocognitive impairment, psychiatric disorders, 
arthralgia, myalgia, exertional malaise, and more, there is considerable 
overlap between PCS and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome (ME/CFS), with some PCS patients meeting diagnostic criteria 
for ME/CFS, known as a sequela of other viral infections usually 
following pandemics (Michelen et al., 2021; Staub et al., 2024; Fark, 
1991; Komaroff et al., 2023). Microvascular dysfunction has been pro­
posed as a key factor in the development of these prolonged symptoms 
following SARS-CoV-2 infections (Kuodi et al., 2023; Hurme et al., 2025; 
Lowenstein et al., 2020; Mclaughlin et al., 2025), with potential con­
sequences for the retinal vasculature (Schlick et al., 2022).
As a highly structured and accessible microvascular network, the 
retina provides a valuable model for investigating systemic vascular 
changes (Patton et al., 2005). The retina is an ideal site for studying local 
microcirculatory dynamics due to its complex mechanisms of blood flow 
autoregulation involving a tightly coordinated neurovascular unit (Kur 
et al., 2012). Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) is a 
non-invasive imaging technique that enables detailed assessment of 
retinal capillary perfusion (Campbell et al., 2017). Previous studies have 
reported reduced vessel density following COVID-19, particularly in the 
superficial, intermediate, and deep capillary plexuses (Zapata et al., 
2022; Banderas García et al., 2022; Turker et al., 2022; Abrishami 
et al., 2021; Guemes-Villahoz et al., 2021; Karkhur et al., 2023). Addi­
tional findings include enlargement of the foveal avascular zone (FAZ), 
reduced foveal vascular density (VD), and reduced central macular 
thickness (CMT = retinal thickness measured at macula) suggesting 
persistent vascular damage. Conversely, transient thickening of the 
retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) has been interpreted as an early in­
flammatory response rather than permanent axonal loss (Ozturk et al., 
2025). Some of these changes were associated with the severity of the 
acute infection as well as with PCS symptom severity, indicating a po­
tential role of SARS-CoV-2 in inducing long-term endothelial dysfunc­
tion (Schlick et al., 2022; Talebnejad et al., 2025). Additional evidence 
of microcirculatory impairment in COVID-19 has been provided by 
other investigations, including a comprehensive review by Ackermann 
et al., which delineates widespread endothelial injury and microvascular 
dysfunction across multiple organ systems (Davis et al., 2023).
In a previous study by our group using static and dynamic retinal 
vessel analysis (RVA), we identified both structural and functional 
vascular abnormalities in PCS patients, compared to SARS-CoV-2 naïve 
participants (Kuchler et al., 2023a). According to our findings, Inver­
nizzi et al. described dilated retinal veins in COVID-19 patients 
(Invernizzi et al., 2021). These findings support the hypothesis of an 
altered retinal microvasculature in PCS. Building on this observation, we 
aimed to investigate whether similar microvascular alterations can be 
detected using OCT and OCTA.
While some studies have demonstrated correlations between the 
severity of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection and changes in OCTA parameters 
such as VD, no studies to date have established a clear relationship be­
tween persistent symptom burden in PCS and alterations in the retinal 
microcirculation (Hohberger et al., 2021). Therefore, it is still contro­
versial whether the chronic changes seen in OCTA are a long-term 
consequence of the acute infection (e.g. microclotting, hypoxemia) or 
reflect an ongoing process of inflammatory or autoimmune genesis 
(Invernizzi et al., 2021; Noor et al., 2023).
To investigate whether persistent retinal changes in PCS are linked to 
systemic pathophysiology, we assessed circulating markers of endothe­
lial dysfunction and chronic inflammation, which are frequently 
elevated in PCS and may contribute to microvascular impairment (Xu 
et al., 2023). In addition, we examined immunoglobulin G (IgG) sub­
classes, given their established roles in antiviral defense and 
autoimmune processes. Subclass-specific mechanisms - such as com­
plement activation by IgG1 - have been implicated in neurovascular 
damage in diseases like AQP4-neuromyelitis-optica-spectrum-disease 
and systemic lupus erythematosus (Cho et al., 2024). These observa­
tions prompted us to explore whether similar humoral immune patterns 
might be reflected in retinal alterations in PCS.
While therapeutic strategies are currently being explored (Stein 
et al., 2025; Espa˜na-Cueto et al., 2025), it remains unclear whether 
the severity of PCS symptoms can be objectively assessed using retinal 
microcirculation parameters derived from OCTA.
To address these knowledge gaps, we conducted a study using OCT 
and OCTA to analyze the retinal microcirculation and neuroretinal 
structure in patients with PCS and individuals who had recovered from 
COVID-19. As described in the “All eyes on PCS” study protocol (Kuchler 
et al., 2023b), we hypothesized that PCS patients may exhibit alterations 
in retinal vessel density within the superficial and deep vascular plex­
uses. Analyses of structural OCT parameters and their associations with 
clinical and laboratory markers were performed in an exploratory, 
hypothesis-generating manner. Characterizing these changes contrib­
utes to a better understanding of PCS pathophysiology and supports the 
evaluation of OCT and OCTA as non-invasive diagnostic and monitoring 
tools in post-viral syndromes.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Study design and cohort
This manuscript is based on the “All Eyes on PCS study”, a pro­
spective, observational, single-center investigation aimed at analyzing 
the retinal microvasculature in individuals with PCS while also con­
ducting a thorough clinical assessment of the participants. The present 
analysis focused on OCTA-derived macular vascular parameters to 
characterize retinal microcirculation. Analyses of structural OCT pa­
rameters and their associations with clinical and laboratory markers 
were conducted in an exploratory, hypothesis-generating manner. The 
study is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/ 
show/NCT05635552).
Between October 2022 and September 2023, a total of 105 PCS pa­
tients were enrolled. The majority (72.4%, 76/105) were recruited via 
social media, while the remaining 27.6% (29/105) were referred from 
the PCS outpatient clinic. Three participants were excluded from the 
final analysis due to specific reasons: one lacked sufficient evidence of a 
prior SARS-CoV-2 infection, another had no clear temporal association 
between infection and the onset of PCS symptoms, and the third did not 
exhibit PCS-related symptoms at the time of recruitment. OCT and OCTA 
data were obtained from 80 to 61 patients, respectively. The control 
group included 102 individuals who had fully recovered from SARS- 
CoV-2 infection and did not fulfill diagnostic criteria for PCS, with 
OCT and OCTA data available for 48 and 33 of them, respectively. In 
total, 82 OCTA scans from 52 participants were excluded due to insuf­
ficient image quality. Additional data loss resulted from participant 
refusal to undergo imaging. Further details on patient recruitment and 
clinical assessment are available in the previously published study 
protocol (Kuchler et al., 2023b).
2.2. Clinical assessment
To ensure a comprehensive evaluation, data collection was con­
ducted through a standardized questionnaire and patient-reported 
outcome measures (PROMs). The questionnaire gathered demographic 
information, pre-existing medical conditions, current medications, and 
PCS symptoms, with a focus on 12 symptom complexes (Kuchler et al., 
2023a). Additionally, PROMs were used to assess various aspects of 
PCS severity and patient well-being:
PCS Severity: Evaluated using the PCS Severity Score (Bahmer et al., 
2022) and the COVID-19 Yorkshire Rehabilitation Scale (C19-YRS) 
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
2 

(O'Connor et al., 2022).
Fatigue: Measured with the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) (Krupp 
et al., 1988).
Depression: Assessed using the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 
(PHQ-9) (Costantini et al., 2021).
Health-Related Quality of Life: Determined through the EuroQol 5- 
Dimensions 5-Levels questionnaire (EQ (5DL)) (Herdman et al., 2011).
ME/CFS Status: Identified based on the Canadian Consensus Criteria 
(Encephalomyelitis/Chronic et al., 2015).
2.3. Laboratory measurements
Blood samples were collected, and standard laboratory measure­
ments were analyzed following previously described protocols (Kuchler 
et al., 2023a). Specific biomarkers were assessed as follows:
Cytokines and Chemokines: Interleukin-6 (IL-6), Interleukin-8 (IL- 
8), Interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (IP10) and Monocyte Che­
moattractant Protein-1 (MCP-1) were quantified using the Cytometric 
Bead Array Flex system (BD Biosciences, San Diego, US). Serum was 
used for these assessments. These biomarkers were selected based on 
their established roles in systemic inflammation (IL-6, IL-8), immune 
activation (IP-10), and monocyte recruitment and chronic inflammatory 
processes (MCP-1), which have been implicated in the pathophysiology 
of PCS (Almulla et al., 2024).
Adhesion Molecules: Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 1 (ICAM-1) 
and Vascular Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 (VCAM-1) were quantified using 
the Cytometric Bead Array Flex system (BD Biosciences, San Diego, US).
Von Willebrand Factor (vWF:Ag) Levels: Measured using the 
LIAPHEN™ vWF:Ag kit (Hyphen Biomed, Neuville-sur-Oise, France) 
through an immunoturbidimetric assay, following the manufacturer's 
guidelines in patient plasma.
2.4. OCT and OCTA assessments
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) and optical coherence to­
mography angiography (OCTA) were performed using a spectral- 
domain OCT device (Spectralis OCT2, Heidelberg Engineering, Ger­
many), including its angiography module for OCTA acquisition. Macular 
OCT scans (30◦× 25◦) were acquired, and segmentation of retinal layers 
was performed using the vendor-provided software (Eye Explorer, 
v2.5.4), with manual correction when necessary. Image quality was 
assessed following the OSCAR-IB criteria (Tewarie et al., 2012).
En-face OCTA images were recorded centered on the fovea centralis 
(2.9 × 2.9 mm). To minimize motion artifacts, active eye tracking was 
employed by a software built-in algorithm. OCTA image quality was 
ensured using the OSCAR-MP criteria (Wicklein et al., 2023). Vessel 
densities in the superficial and deep vascular complexes (SVC and DVC) 
were analyzed around the fovea in 2.5 mm eccentricity (area 4.9 mm2) 
using a deep-learning-based segmentation approach as previously 
described (Kreitner et al., 2023), enabling automated extraction of the 
retinal vascular network and differentiation of vessel diameters.
The following retinal parameters were extracted:
2.5. Structural parameters
All macular layer thickness parameters were derived from 
macular OCT scans, unless otherwise specified.
Inner Nuclear Layer thickness (INL, μm): The retinal layer con­
taining bipolar, horizontal, and amacrine cells, critical for signal trans­
mission between photoreceptors and ganglion cells.
Ganglion Cell Inner Plexiform Layer thickness (GCIP, μm): A 
combined measure of the ganglion cell layer (GCL) and inner plexiform 
layer (IPL).
Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer thickness (RNFL, μm): Macular RNFL 
thickness. This layer contains axons of the ganglion cells, forming the 
optic nerve.
Peripapillary Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer thickness (pRNFL, μm): 
RNFL thickness measured in the peripapillary region, using a separate 
optic disc-centered scan.
Total Macular Volume (TMV, mm3): A volumetric measure of the 
macular region, providing insights into overall retinal structural 
integrity.
Retinal Thickness (μm): The total thickness of retinal layers at the 
center of fovea.
2.6. Vascular parameters
All vascular parameters were derived from OCTA scans centered on 
the macula.
We performed localized SVC and DVC analyses using the Early 
Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) grid (Early Treatment 
Diabetic Retinopathy Study, 1991). To specifically distinguish the 
retinal capillary network from larger vessel structures, vessel densities 
were categorized into diameters of <10 μm and >10 μm. The foveal 
avascular zone (FAZ) was segmented based on the SVC.
Superficial Vascular Complex (SVC, %): Defined as the region 
between the inner limiting membrane (ILM) and the inner plexiform 
layer (IPL). This layer primarily supplies the ganglion cell layer and the 
IPL.
Deep Vascular Complex (DVC, %): Defined as the region between 
IPL and the outer plexiform layer (OPL). This layer is responsible for 
supplying the deeper retinal structures.
Foveal Avascular Zone (FAZ, mm2): The capillary-free central re­
gion of the fovea, crucial for high-acuity vision. Changes in FAZ 
morphology are associated with microvascular dysfunction.
2.7. Statistical methodology
All statistical analyses were conducted using RStudio (Version 12.0, 
2024). Normality was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test for smaller 
sample sizes, while for larger datasets (n > 100), the Kolmogorov- 
Smirnov test was applied. Normally distributed variables were sum­
marized using the mean and standard deviation (SD), whereas non- 
normally distributed data were described with the median and inter­
quartile range (IQR). Retinal parameters were not analyzed indepen­
dently for each eye. Instead, a paired-eye statistical approach was used: 
if both eyes were available within the same analysis group, their mean 
was used as one data point, otherwise the available eye was included. 
Missing values were removed before analysis and visualization to ensure 
accuracy, either during data preprocessing or by enabling the na. 
rm = TRUE function in relevant computations.
Appropriate statistical tests were used based on the distribution of 
the data. For group comparisons, t-tests, Chi-Square tests, or the Mann- 
Whitney U test were applied. Ordinal variables were analyzed using 
proportional odds logistic regression (POLR), adjusting for age and 
gender. Additionally, age- and gender-adjusted p-values for continuous 
and binary baseline variables were obtained using multivariable linear 
and logistic regression models, respectively. As a sensitivity analysis, 
propensity score matching (1:1 nearest-neighbor matching with a 
caliper of 0.4 based on age and sex) was applied to reduce residual 
confounding between PCS patients and COVID-19-recovered controls. 
Correlation analyses were performed using Pearson's correlation for 
normally distributed data and Spearman's correlation for non-normally 
distributed variables. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis 
was used to assess the discriminative power of different variables. To 
ensure consistency between compared models and the corresponding 
AUC estimates, ROC analyses were performed using a complete-case 
approach, including only participants with complete data for all pre­
dictors entered into the respective model. In addition, univariate and 
multivariate logistic (for binary dependent variables) and linear 
regression models (for continuous dependent variables) were used to 
explore associations between variables and outcomes, adjusted for age 
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
3 

and gender. Extreme outliers were identified using the interquartile 
range (IQR) method (values outside 1.5 × IQR) and subsequently 
excluded from further analyses.
3. Results
3.1. Baseline demographic data
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the two cohorts – 
individuals recovered from COVID-19 and patients with PCS – are 
summarized in detail in Table 1. A total of 80 PCS patients and 48 
recovered controls were included in the analysis. Compared to COVID- 
19 recovered individuals, PCS patients were older (median age 40.0 
vs. 26.5 years, p < 0.001), had a higher body mass index (BMI) (23.7 vs. 
22.1 kg/m2, p = 0.029), and more frequently exhibited arterial hyper­
tension (17.5% vs. 2.1%, p = 0.009) as well as hypercholesterolemia 
(48.7% vs. 21.4%, p = 0.006). However, after adjustment for age and 
sex, these differences in cardiovascular risk factors were no longer sta­
tistically significant.
To assess retinal microvascular alterations in patients with PCS, we 
analyzed vessel densities within the superficial (SVC) and deep vascular 
complex (DVC). As shown in Fig. 1a, PCS patients exhibited significantly 
reduced vessel densities in the SVC compared to COVID-19 recovered 
controls, while DVC parameters were less affected. To evaluate the 
diagnostic relevance of these microvascular changes, logistic regression 
analyses were performed (Fig. 1b). In univariate models, reduced SVC 
vessel density was significantly associated with PCS status. However, 
after adjustment for age and gender, this association was no longer 
statistically significant.
In a subgroup analysis of PCS patients with and without comorbid 
ME/CFS (Fig. 1c), we again observed lower SVC vessel densities in pa­
tients with ME/CFS. In multivariate regression models (Fig. 1d), this 
association was no longer statistically significant after adjustment for 
age and sex.
To investigate whether retinal microvascular alterations in PCS pa­
tients are associated with subjective symptom burden, we performed 
exploratory correlation analyses between vessel density and patient- 
reported outcome measures (PROMs), including the PCS Severity 
Score, C19-YRS, PHQ-9, and GAD-7. While a weak negative trend was 
noted between the SVC and the C19-YRS as well as the PHQ-9, none of 
the associations reached statistical significance (see Supplementary 
Figure 1). Likewise, vessel densities in the DVC showed no associa­
tions with symptom severity.
To evaluate potential macular perfusion deficits in PCS, we also 
assessed the size of the foveal avascular zone (FAZ). As shown in 
Supplementary Figure 2, FAZ area did not differ significantly between 
PCS patients and recovered controls, nor between PCS patients with and 
without comorbid ME/CFS. Furthermore, no relevant correlations were 
observed between FAZ area and PROMs. These results indicate that 
central macular perfusion, as reflected by FAZ size, is preserved in PCS, 
even in individuals with pronounced symptom burden.
As shown in Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1, retinal vessel density 
alone did not provide a robust distinction between PCS patients and 
recovered controls, nor did it correlate with subjective symptom burden. 
Nevertheless, given previous reports suggesting microvascular 
dysfunction and neuroinflammatory processes in PCS, we explored 
whether structural retinal changes might reflect disease-relevant tissue 
alterations not captured by vessel density alone.
Exploratory analyses of structural OCT parameters are presented in 
Fig. 2a. PCS patients showed significant thinning of the peripapillary 
retinal nerve fiber layer (pRNFL), the ganglion cell-inner plexiform layer 
(GCIP), and a reduction in total macular volume (TMV), while inner 
nuclear layer (INL) and overall retinal thickness did not differ signifi­
cantly (data not shown). In multivariate logistic regression models 
(Fig. 2b), TMV was significantly associated with PCS status, and the 
GCIP by trend was associated with PCS status. For transparency, all 
Table 1 
Baseline demographic characteristics of the two cohorts (COVID-19 recovered 
individuals and PCS patients). Unadjusted p-values reflect group comparisons 
using appropriate statistical tests; adjusted p-values account for age and gender.
COVID-19 
recovered 
N = 48
PCS 
patients 
N = 80
p-value
Adjusted 
p-value*
Age in years (Median 
(IQR))
26.5 (24.0 - 
34.2)
40.0 (32.0 
- 51.0)
<0.001
-
Gender, male (n, (%))
11 (22.9%)
20 (25.0%)
0.63
-
BMI in kg/m2 (Median 
(IQR))
22.1 (21.1 - 
24.2)
23.7 (21.2 
- 26.7)
0.03
0.40
Obesity (n, (%))
1 (2.1%)
11 (13.8%)
0.03
0.25
Nicotine abuse (n, (%))
5 (10.4%)
9 (11.2%)
1.00
0.69
Arterial hypertension (n, 
%))
1 (2.1%)
14 (17.5%)
0.009
0.15
Diabetes mellitus II (n, 
(%))
0 (0.0%)
1 (1.2%)
1.00
1.00
Hypercholesterolemia (n, 
(%))
9 (21.4%)
38 (48.7%)
0.006
0.08
Severity of acute infection (WHO progression scale)
<0.001
<0.001
0
1 (2.1%)
0 (0.0%)
​
​
1
2 (4.2%)
1 (1.2%)
​
​
2
43 (89.6%)
47 (58.8%)
​
​
3
1 (2.1%)
28 (35.0%)
​
​
4
0 (0.0%)
2 (2.5%)
​
​
5
0 (0.0%)
1 (1.2%)
​
​
6
0 (0.0%)
1 (1.2%)
​
​
8
1 (2.1%)
0 (0.0%)
​
​
Variance
0.003
0.003
Unknown
34 (72.3%)
45 (56.2%)
​
​
Alpha
0 (0.0%)
7 (8.8%)
​
​
Delta
0 (0.0%)
13 (16.2%)
​
​
Omicron
13 (27.7%)
15 (18.8%)
​
​
Number of infections
0.10
0.28
1
29 (60.4%)
53 (66.2%)
​
​
2
14 (29.2%)
25 (31.2%)
​
​
3
5 (10.4%)
1 (1.2%)
​
​
4
0 (0.0%)
1 (1.2%)
​
​
Time since COVID-19 infection
​
​
Mean (±SD)
503.0 
(±332.9)
476.4 
(±272.3)
0.64
0.01
Number of vaccinations
0.001
<0.001
0
0 (0.0%)
5 (6.2%)
​
​
1
1 (2.1%)
2 (2.5%)
​
​
2
2 (4.3%)
21 (26.2%)
​
​
3
30 (63.8%)
43 (53.8%)
​
​
4
14 (29.8%)
7 (8.8%)
​
​
5
0 (0.0%)
2 (2.5%)
​
​
Vaccination before 
infection (n, (%))
43 (93.5%)
52 (67.5%)
0.002
0.65
PCS duration
​
Median (IQR)
0.0 (0.0 - 
0.0)
419.0 
(301.0 - 
603.0)
<0.001
<0.001
Job loss (n, (%))
0 (0.0%)
14 (17.9%)
0.005
0.99
Sick leave (n, (%))
0 (0.0%)
65 (81.2%)
<0.001
0.99
Sick note (Median (IQR))
0.0 (0.0 - 
0.0)
200.0 
(60.5 - 
381.8)
<0.001
<0.001
ME/CFS (n, (%))
0 (0.0%)
53 (67.1%)
<0.001
<0.001
C19-YRS (Mean (±SD))
-
33.9 
(±13.7)
-
-
GAD7 (Median (IQR))
-
5.0 (3.0 - 
9.0)
-
-
PHQ9 (Mean (±SD))
-
10.8 
(±4.3)
-
-
Fatigue Severity Scale 
(Median (IQR))
2.1 (1.6 - 
2.9)
6.2 (5.3 - 
6.7)
<0.001
<0.001
PCS Severity Score (Mean 
(±SD))
0.0 (±0.0)
37.5 
(±10.2)
<0.001
<0.001
Fatigue (n, (%))
0 (0.0%)
77 (96.2%)
<0.001
<0.001
Exercise intolerance (n, 
(%))
1 (2.1%)
76 (95.0%)
<0.001
<0.001
Brainfog (n, (%))
0 (0.0%)
74 (92.5%)
<0.001
<0.001
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
4 

retinal structural and microvascular parameters, including non- 
significant findings, are summarized in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2
Exploratory receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses 
confirmed the diagnostic value of these structural parameters (Fig. 2c). 
The performance of individual OCT metrics was moderate overall, but 
improved after adjusting for potential confounders, such as age and sex. 
GCIP and TMV showed the highest classification accuracy among all 
tested variables. This was further supported by combined models shown 
in supplementary Figure 3, where integrating GCIP thickness with SVC, 
TMV, or pRNFL resulted in an additional gain in diagnostic performance. 
These results suggest that structural OCT measures – alone or in com­
bination – may capture subtle disease-related changes in PCS.
To address potential residual confounding due to the marked age 
difference between PCS patients and COVID-19-recovered controls, we 
performed a propensity score-matched sensitivity analysis using 1:1 
nearest-neighbor matching based on age and sex. After matching, the 
cohorts were well balanced with respect to demographic variables and 
major clinical characteristics (Supplementary Table 3). The overall 
pattern of results was consistent with the primary analyses, with struc­
tural OCT parameters showing nominal group differences, while OCTA- 
derived vessel density measures remained largely unchanged 
(Supplementary Tables 4 and 5).
To explore the association between patient-reported symptom 
burden and retinal structural parameters, we performed correlation 
analyses between clinical scores and both global and layer-specific 
retinal measures (Fig. 3). Correlation analyses with biomarkers and 
PROMs were conducted in an exploratory manner without formal 
correction for multiple testing. As in previous analyses, PROMs showed 
strong intercorrelations, particularly between C19-YRS, PHQ-9, and 
GAD-7 scores. Significant negative correlations were observed between 
INL thickness and C19-YRS (r = −0.30, p = 0.010) as well as PHQ-9 
(r = −0.23, p = 0.043). Similarly, higher C19-YRS scores were associ­
ated with lower TMV (r = −0.31, p = 0.010. Lower RT was associated 
with higher PCS Severity Scores (r = −0.26, p = 0.021). These findings 
suggest a link between subjective symptom burden and subtle retinal 
thinning, particularly within inner retinal layers and macular volume. 
GCIP and pRNFL were included in the correlation analyses but are not 
shown in Fig. 3, as no significant associations with PROMs were 
observed.
Given the observed thinning of inner retinal layers in PCS patients, 
we next aimed to explore whether these structural alterations might be 
linked to systemic immune activity. Specifically, we investigated asso­
ciations between retinal OCT parameters and serum Immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) subclass levels, as potential markers of immune system 
dysregulation.
As shown in Fig. 4a, IgG1 levels showed positive correlations with 
SVC, TMV, INL thickness, and overall retinal thickness. These relation­
ships were further examined in uni- and multivariate linear regression 
models (Fig. 4b). In the multivariate analysis, the association between 
IgG1 and retinal thickness remained statistically significant, while as­
sociations with INL and SVC showed trends toward significance. This 
supports a potential link between systemic immune status and retinal 
integrity in PCS.
To assess the potential involvement of inflammatory and vascular 
mechanisms in retinal alterations in PCS, associations between OCT and 
OCTA parameters and circulating biomarkers of inflammation and ED 
were analyzed. This included cytokines, chemokines, adhesion mole­
cules, and factors involved in vascular homeostasis.
As shown in Fig. 5a and b, higher D-dimer levels were linked to lower 
SVC density. Higher D-dimer levels were also associated with lower 
GCIP and pRNFL thickness. In addition, higher thrombocyte counts were 
related to lower GCIP thickness. No significant correlations were found 
for other markers of ED.
Associations with markers of systemic inflammation are shown in 
Fig. 5c and d. Higher MCP-1 levels were associated with lower INL 
thickness (r = −0.37) and lower GCIP thickness (r = −0.24). No sig­
nificant correlations were observed between structural OCT parameters 
and IP10, RANTES, or IL-8.
Fig. 1. Boxplots show cohort differences between PCS and recovered participants for DVC and SVC (a). Forest plot showing univariate and multivariate logistic 
regression analyses for DVC and SVC, adjusted for age and sex, with PCS as the dependent variable (b). Boxplots show differences in vessel density between PCS 
patients with and without ME/CFS (c). Forest plot showing univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses for DVC and SVC, adjusted for age and sex, with 
ME/CFS as the dependent variable (d).
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
5 

4. Discussion
This study investigated structural and vascular retinal changes in 
PCS patients using OCT and OCTA, comparing them with recovered 
controls. The primary goal was to assess differences in retinal parame­
ters between PCS patients and fully recovered individuals. The second­
ary goal was to explore associations between retinal findings and both 
PROMs and circulating biomarkers indicative of chronic inflammation 
and endothelial dysfunction. Our results highlight subtle but consistent 
alterations in retinal layer thickness in PCS, with limited correlation to 
subjective symptom burden and markers of immune and endothelial 
dysregulation. These findings underscore the potential of OCT and 
OCTA as non-invasive biomarkers for assessing microvascular integrity 
in PCS patients.
4.1. Retinal imaging suggests vascular dysregulation rather than 
structural capillary damage in PCS
While OCTA has previously been applied in PCS populations, this is 
the first study to correlate OCTA-derived microvascular parameters with 
a range of validated PROMs and PCS-specific disease severity scores. 
Several studies have examined OCTA changes in post-COVID-19 pop­
ulations (Banderas García et al., 2022; Cennamo et al., 2021; 
Bilbao-Malav´e et al., 2021; Turker et al., 2021; Gonz´alez-Zamora et al., 
2021), including some specifically focusing on PCS cohorts (Schlick 
et al., 2022; Szewczykowski et al., 2022). The results across studies 
are heterogeneous and sometimes contradictory. This may in part be 
explained by the frequently small sample sizes and differences in the 
timing and severity of infection, as well as inconsistent adjustment for 
potential confounding factors such as age, cardiovascular comorbidities, 
and smoking status (Jerratsch et al., 2024). Additionally, many studies 
use SARS-CoV-2–naïve individuals as control groups rather than in­
dividuals who have recovered from COVID-19, which may limit the 
specificity of observed differences to PCS rather than general 
post-infectious effects.
Several studies that examined patients in the early convalescent 
phase (weeks after infection) have reported significantly reduced VD in 
both SVC and DVC. Turker et al. (2021) and Gonz´alez-Zamora et al. 
(2021) found lower VD in both plexuses shortly after acute COVID-19. 
Similarly, mid-to long-term studies up to eight months post-infection 
also observed reductions in VD (Banderas García et al., 2022; 
Cennamo et al., 2021; Bilbao-Malav´e et al., 2021), suggesting that 
retinal microvascular changes may persist beyond the acute phase. 
However, most of these studies examined general post-COVID-19 pop­
ulations, including COVID-19 recovered patients, rather than 
well-characterized PCS cohorts. Furthermore, OCTA depicts blood flow 
rather than structure, so these observations could also be a result of 
vasoconstriction.
Multiple pathophysiological findings suggest impaired microcircu­
lation in PCS. Kub´ankov´a et al. reported persistent deformation of red 
and white blood cells months after SARS-CoV-2 infection (Kub´ankov´a 
et al., 2021). Furthermore, autoantibodies against G-protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCR-AAbs) and β-adrenergic receptors have been detected 
in a substantial proportion of PCS patients (Sotzny et al., 2022; Wallukat 
et al., 2021). In a more targeted cohort, Szewczykowski et al. demon­
strated significantly reduced VD in both the superficial and deep 
vascular complexes (SVC, DVC) in 40 PCS patients, all of whom were 
GPCR-AAbs positive (Szewczykowski et al., 2022). Similarly, Schlick 
Fig. 2. Panel a displays boxplots comparing OCT and OCTA parameters between patients with PCS and recovered controls. Statistical comparisons were performed 
using independent t-test. Panel b presents the results of both uni- and multivariate logistic regression models assessing the association between individual OCT 
parameters and the likelihood of having PCS, adjusted for age and gender. Regression coefficients are visualized alongside confidence intervals and p-values. Panel c 
shows receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves adjusted for age and gender for each OCT parameter in predicting PCS status. Abbreviations: PCS = post-COVID 
syndrome; pRNFL = peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer; GCIP = ganglion cell inner plexiform layer; TMV = total macular volume; SVC = superficial vascular 
complex; AUC = area under the curve; CI = confidence interval.
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
6 

et al. reported reduced VD in the intermediate capillary plexus (ICP) in 
173 PCS patients compared with healthy controls (Schlick et al., 2022). 
These findings suggest the existence of distinct PCS subgroups – 
potentially driven by immune mechanisms – in which microvascular 
dysfunction is particularly pronounced. Such evidence underscores the 
heterogeneity of the PCS population, which must be considered when 
interpreting microvascular alterations in this context.
In contrast, our study did not reveal significant differences in VD 
between PCS patients and controls, nor any meaningful correlations 
between VD and PROMs such as the PCS Score, C19-YRS, PHQ-9, or 
GAD-7. This lack of association remained unchanged when stratified by 
vessel diameter. The foveal avascular zone (FAZ), a surrogate marker of 
central macular perfusion, was also preserved and showed no associa­
tion with symptom burden or comorbid ME/CFS. These results suggest 
that, in our cohort, retinal microvascular perfusion, measured by OCTA, 
is not a reliable marker of subjective symptom severity in PCS. This 
divergence from prior OCTA studies reporting reduced retinal vessel 
density in PCS (Schlick et al., 2022; Szewczykowski et al., 2022) may 
reflect differences in cohort characteristics, including the longer time 
since infection, milder acute disease, and the use of COVID-19-recovered 
rather than SARS-CoV-2-naïve controls.
Our findings are consistent with those of Noor et al., who also re­
ported no OCTA abnormalities or structural retinal changes in PCS pa­
tients with mild disease and a longer interval since infection. Rather 
than indicating full recovery of retinal microcirculation, these results 
may suggest that OCTA is not the most suitable tool for detecting 
microvascular alterations in this context. As OCTA is a metabolic im­
aging modality rather than a structural one, it does not reflect vascular 
changes as long as blood flow remains constant. Importantly, our pre­
vious investigations using retinal vessel analysis (RVA) in the same 
cohort revealed functional abnormalities, including reduced venous 
flicker-induced dilation (vFID) and changes in arteriovenous ratio (AVR) 
(Kuchler et al., 2023a). Unlike OCTA, which provides static structural 
information about capillary perfusion, RVA assesses dynamic vascular 
reactivity and larger vessel morphology in the peripapillary region. In 
our cohort, the functional assessment via RVA appeared more sensitive 
than OCTA, potentially due to its ability to capture autoregulatory 
dysfunction. The absence of OCTA-detectable abnormalities despite 
RVA-detected changes suggests that PCS-associated vascular dysregu­
lation may preferentially affect larger vessels or dynamic regulatory 
mechanisms rather than resting capillary flow. The underlying reasons 
for this discrepancy remain unclear, but our findings highlight the 
importance of method selection when assessing retinal microcirculation 
in PCS.
Taken together, these results highlight key methodological and 
physiological distinctions between retinal imaging modalities in PCS. 
While OCTA remains a valuable tool for detecting microvascular alter­
ations, it may not fully capture the complexity of vascular dysfunction in 
PCS, particularly in the absence of structural vessel damage. Multimodal 
vascular assessment including both static and dynamic imaging may 
provide a more comprehensive understanding of PCS-associated 
vascular pathology. These findings suggest that the absence of signifi­
cant OCTA findings does not contradict the RVA results but rather 
suggests that microvascular perfusion may be relatively preserved at 
rest, despite functional impairments in vascular autoregulation. It also 
suggests that PCS-associated ED may preferentially affect larger-caliber 
vessels or dynamic vascular responsiveness, which OCTA alone may not 
adequately reflect. Future studies should incorporate longitudinal de­
signs, standardized definitions of PCS, and stratification by immuno­
logical, autonomic, or severity-based subtypes to better define the role of 
retinal biomarkers in diagnosis, monitoring, and therapeutic decision- 
making in PCS.
Fig. 3. Pairwise correlation matrix including PROMs −
PCS Severity Score, C19-Yorkshire Rehabilitation Scale Symptom Severity (C19-YRS), Patient Health 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), and Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale-7 (GAD-7) −
and OCT parameters: inner nuclear layer (INL), retinal thickness (RT) and total 
macular volume (TMV). The diagonal panels show the distribution of each variable as kernel density plots. Lower panels display scatterplots with fitted linear 
regression lines and 95% confidence intervals. Upper panels present Pearson correlation coefficients (R), with significance levels indicated as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, 
***p < 0.001. Complete cases were used for all pairwise correlations.
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
7 

4.2. Structural retinal alterations in PCS: associations with neuroretinal 
changes
Several studies have investigated retinal changes using OCT in post- 
COVID-19 patients, including some with PCS. Findings vary, with re­
ports of both thinning and thickening in inner retinal layers such as the 
Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer (RNFL), Ganglion Cell Layer (GCL), and Inner 
Plexiform Layer (IPL), possibly reflecting neuroinflammatory or 
ischemic mechanisms (Jerratsch et al., 2024). However, only a few 
studies focus specifically on PCS cohorts, often with small sample sizes 
and inconsistent control for confounders. Importantly, variability in the 
time elapsed since acute infection further complicates interpretation.
Kanra et al. (2022) investigated 34 patients diagnosed with 
Long-COVID and reported significant thinning in at least half of the 
RNFL, GCL, IPL, and the overall inner retinal layer compared to healthy 
controls. No significant differences were found in the peripapillary RNFL 
(pRNFL) or central macular thickness. In contrast, Da˘g S¸eker et al. (Da˘g 
S¸eker et al., 2023) examined 27 recovered COVID-19 patients – using the 
term "Long-COVID" to describe general post-infectious sequelae rather 
than the clinically defined syndrome – and 27 healthy controls. They 
found thinning in segments of the macula as well as in the RNFL, pRNFL, 
GCIP and outer nuclear layer (ONL) at both one- and twelve-month 
post-infection.
In contrast, several studies have investigated retinal structural 
changes in the early period following SARS-CoV-2 infection, typically 
within the first few weeks. Oren et al. (2021) examined patients 14-30 
days after symptom onset and reported increased central macular 
thickness (CMT) in the COVID-19 group, while the GCIP and INL were 
significantly thinner. No significant differences were observed in pRNFL 
thickness. Burgos-Blasco et al. (2022) found a significantly increased 
pRNFL thickness in recovered COVID-19 patients four weeks after 
infection. Meanwhile, Gonz´alez-Zamora (Gonz´alez-Zamora et al., 2021) 
et al. found no significant differences in retinal or RNFL thickness two 
weeks post-infection.
In our study, the median time since the acute infection was 476.4 
(±272.3) days, which is much longer than in the studies mentioned 
above. PCS patients in our cohort showed significant thinning of the 
pRNFL, GCIP and TMV, while INL and total retinal thickness remained 
unchanged.
These findings may reflect the temporal dynamics of inflammation- 
related retinal changes following SARS-CoV-2 infection. In the early 
post-infectious phase, localized inflammation, particularly in the peri­
papillary region, may contribute to transient thickening of the RNFL, as 
observed by Burgos-Blasco et al. In contrast, studies examining patients 
weeks to months after infection, such as those by Kanra et al. and Da˘g 
S¸eker et al., more frequently report thinning of inner retinal layers, 
including the RNFL, pRNFL and GCIP. This suggests that persistent or 
unresolved inflammation in later stages may be associated with retinal 
thinning observed on OCT. The shift from inflammatory swelling to 
degenerative thinning may therefore underlie the divergent findings 
across timepoints.
Importantly, our observations of pRNFL and GCIP thinning in PCS 
patients are structurally similar to findings observed in neurodegener­
ative diseases. A recent meta-analysis in multiple sclerosis (MS) 
Fig. 4. Scatterplots show significant correlations for various OCT and OCTA parameters and IgG1 levels (a). Forest Plot shows uni- and multivariate linear regression 
analysis for INL, TMV, RT and SVC with IgG1 level as the dependent variable. Regression coefficients with corresponding confidence intervals and p-values are 
shown (b).
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
8 

demonstrated that patients consistently exhibit significant thinning of 
both pRNFL and GCIP layers compared with healthy controls, reflecting 
axonal and neuronal loss as hallmarks of central nervous system 
degeneration (Filippatou et al., 2025). Beyond MS, similar OCT-derived 
retinal alterations have been reported in other autoimmune neuro­
inflammatory conditions such as neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder 
(Oertel et al., 2021), as well as in systemic autoimmune diseases like 
systemic lupus erythematosus (Dias-Santos et al., 2021). Moreover, 
comparable retinal changes, including pRNFL and GCIP thinning, have 
also been described in neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's 
disease or Huntington's disease (Biousse et al., 2022). These parallels 
might highlight similarities in retinal thinning patterns. However, 
whether comparable neurodegenerative mechanisms contribute to 
retinal alterations in PCS remain speculative.
In addition, several OCT-derived parameters, including pRNFL, GCIP 
and TMV, showed acceptable to good predictive value for detecting PCS, 
with age- and sex-adjusted AUCs ranging from 0.77 to 0.78.Higher PCS 
symptom burden was related to lower retinal thickness, as indicated by 
the PCS Score, with similar but no significant associations observed for 
C19-YRS and PHQ-9. In addition, lower INL thickness was associated 
with higher C19-YRS scores. These associations highlight the potential 
clinical relevance of retinal biomarkers for assessing symptom severity 
in PCS. The association of OCT parameters with both structural alter­
ations and symptom burden suggests their potential relevance for un­
derstanding disease mechanisms and stratifying patient groups in future 
studies.
4.3. Retinal-IgG signature and possible implications in PCS 
pathophysiology
We identified a retinal-IgG signature in PCS patients, characterized 
by higher IgG1 levels being associated with greater retinal thickness, 
GCIP thickness, and SVC density, while higher IgG1 levels were asso­
ciated with smaller FAZ area. Notably, retinal thickness maintained a 
robust association with IgG1 after adjusting for demographic and clin­
ical confounders (Fig. 4), showing a thinner retina in patients with lower 
IgG1 levels.
These findings align in part with existing knowledge about IgG1 and 
IgG3, subclasses crucial in antiviral immune responses, as previously 
demonstrated in Epstein–Barr virus infections (Karsten et al., 2022) and 
Fig. 5. Correlation plots illustrate relationships between OCTA parameters with markers of endothelial dysfunction (a) and inflammation (b) and between OCT 
parameters between markers of endothelial dysfunction (c) and inflammation (d). Correlations were calculated using Pearson's test for normally distributed variables 
and Spearman's test for non-normally distributed variables. Only statistically significant correlations (p < 0.05) are displayed with the corresponding r value. The 
color intensity of each tile reflects the strength of the correlation. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web 
version of this article.)
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
9 

hepatitis C, where elevated levels reflect effective antiviral activity (Ye 
et 
al., 
2024). 
Moreover, 
IgG1 
subclasses 
can 
induce 
complement-dependent cytotoxicity, relevant in autoimmune demye­
linating disorders (Masciocchi et al., 2025). Chronic inflammatory or 
autoimmune conditions might lead to continuous Fcγ receptor-mediated 
endocytosis of IgG1-antigen complexes, resulting in enhanced internal­
ization, subsequent degradation, and potential alterations in circulating 
IgG1 concentrations (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study, 
1991).
Collectively, our results suggest that retinal structural and vascular 
alterations in PCS could be linked to persistent systemic immune acti­
vation or inflammation, reflected by altered IgG1 dynamics. Lower 
circulating IgG1 levels, associated with reduced retinal thickness, may 
indicate ongoing inflammation and immune dysregulation in PCS, 
although such associations may also be influenced by broader systemic 
immune status or residual clinical and demographic confounding. Spe­
cifically, decreased IgG1 could reflect enhanced immune activation or 
altered immunoglobulin dynamics, while a direct contribution to retinal 
structural changes remains hypothetical. Alternatively, lowered IgG1 
might represent impaired immune function and incomplete viral clear­
ance, maintaining persistent inflammation. Further studies are needed 
to elucidate the exact role of IgG1 and its involvement in complement- 
mediated mechanisms or persistent viral activity within the pathogen­
esis of PCS.
4.4. Retinal alterations and markers of endothelial dysfunction and 
inflammation in PCS
Our findings highlight significant correlations between structural 
retinal parameters detectable via OCT and systemic markers of ED and 
inflammation in PCS patients, which may provide insights into the un­
derlying pathophysiology of PCS. We observed associations between 
various retinal layer parameters with endothelial markers such as 
thrombocytes, and D-dimer, as well as the inflammatory marker MCP-1 
(Fig. 5).
These correlations align with previously described mechanisms of 
chronic endothelialitis, disrupted nitric oxide signaling, increased 
vascular permeability, and pro-thrombotic conditions characteristic of 
PCS (Barrett et al., 2021; Halawa et al., 2022; Varga et al., 2020; Pandian 
et al., 2025; Santoro et al., 2023).
Such persistent endothelial and inflammatory processes may be 
associated with systemic and neurovascular alterations, mirrored by 
structural retinal changes detectable via OCT and OCTA imaging. Our 
data thus supports the concept of retinal imaging as a valuable tool for 
assessing systemic microvascular and inflammatory involvement in PCS 
patients.
Moreover, these retinal changes may reflect deeper alterations in 
neurovascular coupling, the dynamic interaction between neuronal ac­
tivity, glial support, and microvascular perfusion (Kempuraj et al., 
2024). Neuroinflammation in PCS, marked by sustained microglial 
activation and cytokine dysregulation, is thought to compromise this 
coupling, potentially leading to cerebral hypoperfusion and neural 
injury (Vlaicu et al., 2023; Chaves-Filho et al., 2023; CJ and AS, 2025). 
Recent evidence from individuals with PCS and cognitive impairment 
demonstrates that persistent systemic inflammation and blood-brain 
barrier (BBB) disruption are central features of the condition. Specif­
ically, patients with brain fog exhibited increased BBB permeability in 
frontal and temporal brain regions alongside elevated serum levels of 
S100β and TGFβ, markers associated with astrocytic activation and 
vascular damage (Greene et al., 2024). Given the anatomical and 
physiological parallels between the retina and the brain, such dysregu­
lation may manifest in the retina as structural changes, such as thinning 
of the inner retinal layers. These alterations are readily captured by 
OCT, supporting its potential as a non-invasive modality to investigate 
the systemic and cerebral consequences of PCS. In our study, we pri­
marily observed alterations in retinal layer thickness, while 
microvascular OCTA parameters remained largely unaltered. This sug­
gests that in the context of PCS, structural neuroretinal changes may be 
more prominent or more readily detectable than microvascular 
alterations.
4.5. Strengths and limitations
This study has several notable strengths that contribute to the 
growing body of literature on PCS and retinal imaging. To our knowl­
edge, it is the first to systematically correlate OCTA-derived microvas­
cular parameters, including vessel densities in the superficial and deep 
vascular complexes, with a range of validated patient-reported outcome 
measures (PROMs) and clinical disease severity scores in PCS. Our PCS 
cohort is well-characterized, with inclusion based on current consensus 
definitions and standardized symptom assessments, enhancing compa­
rability and interpretability. Importantly, the median time since infec­
tion exceeded 15 months, allowing us to assess long-term retinal 
changes well beyond the acute or subacute stages. Notably, we identified 
structural retinal alterations (e.g., thinning of pRNFL, GCIP, and TMV) 
that were significantly associated with symptom severity, suggesting 
potential utility of OCT-based metrics as objective, non-invasive bio­
markers in PCS. These findings may inform future studies on patient 
stratification and therapeutic monitoring. Finally, the study design 
accounted for potential confounding variables and included careful 
interpretation of null findings, ensuring methodological transparency 
and robustness of conclusions.
However, certain limitations must be acknowledged. This was a 
monocentric study, which may limit the generalizability of our findings. 
A notable number of OCTA scans were excluded due to participant 
refusal or insufficient image quality, which may have introduced se­
lection bias and could have affected the representativeness of the 
analyzed cohort and the detection of subtle microvascular alterations. 
Although we adjusted for age differences between PCS patients and 
controls using multivariate models, some residual confounding cannot 
be excluded. To further address this limitation, we performed a pro­
pensity score-matched sensitivity analysis based on age and sex, which 
yielded results consistent with the primary analysis. The cross-sectional 
design limits conclusions about the temporal progression or persistence 
of retinal changes in PCS. In addition, the parent study was originally 
designed to investigate retinal microcirculation, whereas structural OCT 
analyses and retinal associations with clinical and laboratory markers 
represent exploratory extensions of this protocol-defined framework. 
Accordingly, these findings should be interpreted as hypothesis- 
generating rather than confirmatory. Importantly, OCT-derived retinal 
thinning cannot be directly interpreted as evidence of neuro­
degeneration but rather reflects unspecific structural alterations that 
may result from a variety of underlying processes. Additionally, OCTA 
captures only static flow at rest and may miss functional or dynamic 
vascular abnormalities. Our analysis focused on the superficial and deep 
plexuses, but changes in other vascular layers, such as the intermediate 
plexus or choriocapillaris, cannot be ruled out. Finally, while PROMs 
provide important insight into symptom burden, they are subjective and 
may not directly reflect underlying pathophysiology. Future multi­
center, longitudinal studies with broader phenotyping are needed to 
validate and expand on these findings. In particular, a mechanistic link 
between neurodegeneration and OCT changes is needed to better 
interpret the results.
5. Conclusion
In this study, we investigated both structural and microvascular 
retinal changes in patients with PCS using retinal OCT imaging. While 
OCTA-derived vessel density in the superficial and deep vascular plex­
uses did not differ significantly from controls or correlate with symptom 
severity, OCT-based structural parameters such as pRNFL, GCIP, and 
TMV were significantly reduced in PCS patients and showed associations 
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
10 

with validated symptom scores. These findings suggest that retinal 
structural alterations are associated with PCS and symptom severity and 
may be compatible with neuroinflammatory or neuroretinal changes. In 
contrast, the absence of OCTA abnormalities, particularly in a cohort 
with long post-infection intervals and mild acute disease, suggests that 
retinal blood flow at rest may be preserved, despite previously reported 
functional dysregulation in larger retinal vessels. Taken together, our 
results highlight the potential utility of OCT structural metrics for pa­
tient stratification and clinical monitoring in PCS, while underscoring 
the need for longitudinal, multicenter studies to further explore the 
temporal dynamics and mechanistic underpinnings of retinal changes in 
this complex condition.
Consent to participate
Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants 
included in the study.
Ethical approval
The study protocol received ethical approval from the Ethics Com­
mittee of the Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Kli­
nikum rechts der Isar (Approval number: 2022-317-S-SR). This study 
was performed in accordance with the ethical standards as laid down in 
the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments or compa­
rable ethical standards.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
manuscript preparation process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used generative AI 
tools (Microsoft Copilot) to assist with language editing, restructuring, 
and clarification of phrasing. The authors critically reviewed and revised 
all generated content and take full responsibility for the accuracy and 
integrity of the final manuscript.
Funding and conflicts of interest
Rebecca Wicklein received an intramural research grant from the 
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine and was supported 
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research 
Foundation) under Germany's Excellence Strategy within the framework 
of the Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (EXC 2145 SyNergy – ID 
390857198). Rebecca Wicklein received a poster award from Novartis. 
Martin J. Menten is funded by the German Research Foundation under 
projects 532139938. Timon Wallraven received an intramural research 
grant from the Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine.
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. This 
study is sponsored by the Bavarian State Ministry of Science and Art, as 
part of its Special Funding Program for the Scientific Coronavirus 
Research Projects of the Technical University of Munich School of 
Medicine at the University Medical Center “Rechts der Isar” (Funding 
Identification Number H.4001.1.7-53/7).
Furthermore, this study received Funding from the VADYS-ME 
Research Program.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Michael Wunderle: Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, 
Writing – original draft. Rebecca Wicklein: Investigation, Methodol­
ogy. Andrea Ribeiro: Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Javier 
Carbajo-Lozoya: Writing – review & editing. Anna W¨ohnl: Writing – 
review & editing. Johanna Negele: Investigation. Veronika Kesseler: 
Investigation. Anna Wild: Writing – review & editing. Samuel Nie­
dermayer: Writing – review & editing. Isabelle Lethen: Writing – re­
view & editing. Maciej Lech: Writing – review & editing. Martin J. 
Menten: Writing – review & editing. Linus Kreitner: Data curation. 
Christoph Schmaderer: Conceptualization, Project administration, 
Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Timon Wallraven: Concep­
tualization, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Writing 
– review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Martin Menten and Rebecca Wicklein report financial support was 
provided by German Research Foundation. Timon Wallraven reports 
financial support was provided by Technical University of Munich. 
Christoph Schmaderer reports financial support was provided by 
Bavarian State Ministry for Science and Art. Rebecca Wicklein received a 
poster award from Novartis If there are other authors, they declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal re­
lationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in 
this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bbih.2026.101315.
Data availability
The datasets and analysis code generated and/or analyzed during the 
current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable 
request.
References
Abrishami, M., et al., 2021. Optical coherence tomography angiography analysis of the 
retina in patients recovered from COVID-19: a case-control study. Can. J. 
Ophthalmol. 56 (1), 24–30.
Almulla, A.F., et al., 2024. Immune activation and immune-associated neurotoxicity in 
Long-COVID: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 103 studies comprising 58 
cytokines/chemokines/growth factors. Brain Behav. Immun. 122, 75–94.
Bahmer, T., et al., 2022. Severity, predictors and clinical correlates of Post-COVID 
syndrome (PCS) in Germany: a prospective, multi-centre, population-based cohort 
study. EClinicalMedicine 51, 101549.
Banderas García, S., et al., 2022. Persistent reduction of retinal microvascular vessel 
density in patients with moderate and severe COVID-19 disease. BMJ Open 
Ophthalmol. 7 (1), e000867.
Barrett, T.J., et al., 2021. Platelets amplify endotheliopathy in COVID-19. Sci. Adv. 7 
(37), eabh2434.
Bilbao-Malav´e, V., et al., 2021. Persistent retinal microvascular impairment in COVID-19 
bilateral pneumonia at 6-Months Follow-Up assessed by optical coherence 
tomography angiography. Biomedicines 9 (5).
Biousse, V., et al., 2022. Imaging of the optic nerve: technological advances and future 
prospects. Lancet Neurol. 21 (12), 1135–1150.
Burgos-Blasco, B., et al., 2022. Optic nerve and macular optical coherence tomography in 
recovered COVID-19 patients. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. 32 (1), 628–636.
Campbell, J.P., et al., 2017. Detailed vascular anatomy of the human retina by 
projection-resolved optical coherence tomography angiography. Sci. Rep. 7, 42201.
Cennamo, G., et al., 2021. Optical coherence tomography angiography features in Post- 
COVID-19 pneumonia patients: a pilot study. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 227, 182–190.
Charfeddine, S., et al., 2021. Long COVID 19 syndrome: is it related to microcirculation 
and endothelial dysfunction? Insights from TUN-EndCOV study. Front. Cardiovasc. 
Med. 8, 745758.
Chaves-Filho, A.M., et al., 2023. Chronic inflammation, neuroglial dysfunction, and 
plasmalogen deficiency as a new pathobiological hypothesis addressing the overlap 
between post-COVID-19 symptoms and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Brain Res. Bull. 201, 110702.
Cho, E.B., et al., 2024. Differentiated pattern of complement system activation between 
MOG-IgG-associated disease and AQP4-IgG-positive neuromyelitis optica spectrum 
disorder. Front. Immunol. 15, 1320094.
CJ, B., 2025. In: AS, B. (Ed.), Post Covid Syndrome and Cognitive Dysfunction – 
Aetiology and Possible Treatment. Archives of Microbiology and Immunology.
Costantini, L., et al., 2021. Screening for depression in primary care with patient health 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9): a systematic review. J. Affect. Disord. 279, 473–483.
Da˘g S¸eker, E., Erbahçeci Timur, ˙I., 2023. Assessment of early and long-COVID related 
retinal neurodegeneration with optical coherence tomography. Int. Ophthalmol. 43 
(6), 2073–2081.
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
11 

Davis, H.E., et al., 2023. Long COVID: major findings, mechanisms and 
recommendations. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 21 (3), 133–146.
Dias-Santos, A., et al., 2021. Retinal and choroidal thickness changes in systemic lupus 
erythematosus patients: a longitudinal study. Eye (Lond) 35 (10), 2771–2780.
Early treatment diabetic retinopathy study design and baseline patient characteristics. 
ETDRS report number 7. Ophthalmology 98 (5 Suppl. l), 1991, 741–756.
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic, C.o.t.D.C.f.M., et al., 2015. Beyond Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness.
Espa˜na-Cueto, S., et al., 2025. Plasma exchange therapy for the post COVID-19 condition: 
a phase II, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Nat. Commun. 16 (1), 
1929.
Fark, A.R., 1991. Infectious mononucleosis, Epstein-Barr virus, and chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a prospective case series. J. Fam. Pract. 32 (2), 202, 205-206, 209. 
Filippatou, A., et al., 2025. Optical coherence tomography and angiography in multiple 
sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Neurol. Sci. 470, 123422.
Gonz´alez-Zamora, J., et al., 2021. Retinal microvascular impairment in COVID-19 
bilateral pneumonia assessed by optical coherence tomography angiography. 
Biomedicines 9 (3).
Greene, C., et al., 2024. Author correction: blood-brain barrier disruption and sustained 
systemic inflammation in individuals with long COVID-associated cognitive 
impairment. Nat. Neurosci. 27 (5), 1019.
Guemes-Villahoz, N., et al., 2021. Reduced macular vessel density in COVID-19 patients 
with and without associated thrombotic events using optical coherence tomography 
angiography. Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 259 (8), 2243–2249.
Halawa, S., et al., 2022. Potential long-term effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on the 
pulmonary vasculature: a global perspective. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 19 (5), 314–331.
Herdman, M., et al., 2011. Development and preliminary testing of the new five-level 
version of EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L). Qual. Life Res. 20 (10), 1727–1736.
Hohberger, B., et al., 2021. Retinal microcirculation as a correlate of a systemic capillary 
impairment after severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. Front. 
Med. 8, 676554.
Hurme, A., et al., 2025. Post-COVID-19 condition in prospective inpatient and outpatient 
cohorts. Sci. Rep. 15 (1), 6925.
Invernizzi, A., et al., 2021. Retinal vessels modifications in acute and post-COVID-19. Sci. 
Rep. 11 (1), 19373.
Jerratsch, H., et al., 2024. The current status of OCT and OCTA imaging for the diagnosis 
of long COVID. J. Clinic. Translation. Ophthalmol. 2, 113–130. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/jcto2040010.
Kanra, A.Y., Altınel, M.G., Alparslan, F., 2022. Evaluation of retinal and choroidal 
parameters as neurodegeneration biomarkers in patients with post-covid-19 
syndrome. Photodiagnosis Photodyn. Ther. 40, 103108.
Karkhur, S., et al., 2023. Optical coherence tomography-based assessment of macular 
vessel density, retinal layer metrics and sub-foveal choroidal thickness in COVID-19 
recovered patients. Indian J. Ophthalmol. 71 (2), 385–395.
Karsten, C.B., et al., 2022. Evolution of functional antibodies following acute Epstein- 
Barr virus infection. PLoS Pathog. 18 (9), e1010738.
Kempuraj, D., et al., 2024. Neurovascular unit, neuroinflammation and 
neurodegeneration markers in brain disorders. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 18, 1491952.
Komaroff, A.L., Lipkin, W.I., 2023. ME/CFS and long COVID share similar symptoms and 
biological abnormalities: road map to the literature. Front. Med. 10, 1187163.
Kreitner, L., et al., 2023. Automated analysis of diabetic retinopathy using vessel 
segmentation maps as inductive bias. In: Mitosis Domain Generalization and 
Diabetic Retinopathy Analysis. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham. 
Krupp, L.B., et al., 1988. Fatigue in multiple sclerosis. Arch. Neurol. 45 (4), 435–437.
Kub´ankov´a, M., et al., 2021. Physical phenotype of blood cells is altered in COVID-19. 
Biophys. J. 120 (14), 2838–2847.
Kuchler, T., et al., 2023a. Correction: persistent endothelial dysfunction in post-COVID- 
19 syndrome and its associations with symptom severity and chronic inflammation. 
Angiogenesis 26 (4), 565.
Kuchler, T., et al., 2023b. All eyes on PCS: analysis of the retinal microvasculature in 
patients with post-COVID syndrome-study protocol of a 1 year prospective case- 
control study. Eur. Arch. Psychiatr. Clin. Neurosci.
Kuodi, P., et al., 2023. Characterization of post-COVID syndromes by symptom cluster 
and time period up to 12 months post-infection: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 134, 1–7.
Kur, J., Newman, E.A., Chan-Ling, T., 2012. Cellular and physiological mechanisms 
underlying blood flow regulation in the retina and choroid in health and disease. 
Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 31 (5), 377–406.
Lowenstein, C.J., Solomon, S.D., 2020. Severe COVID-19 is a microvascular disease. 
Circulation 142 (17), 1609–1611.
Masciocchi, S., et al., 2025. Conformational antibodies to proteolipid Protein-1 and its 
peripheral isoform DM20 in patients with CNS autoimmune demyelinating 
disorders. Neurol. Neuroimmunol. Neuroinflamm. 12 (2), e200359.
Mclaughlin, M., et al., 2025. People with long COVID and myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
chronic fatigue syndrome exhibit similarly impaired vascular function. Am. J. Med. 
138 (3), 560–566.
Michelen, M., et al., 2021. Characterising long COVID: a living systematic review. BMJ 
Glob. Health 6 (9).
NICE, 2021. N.I.o.H.a.C.E. COVID-19 Rapid Guide.: Manag. Long-Term Effect. COVID- 
19. Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng188/chapter/1-Id 
entification#case-definition.
Noor, M., et al., 2023. Retinal microvasculature image analysis using optical coherence 
tomography angiography in patients with Post-COVID-19 syndrome. J. Imaging 9 
(11).
O'Connor, R.J., et al., 2022. The COVID-19 yorkshire rehabilitation scale (C19-YRS): 
application and psychometric analysis in a post-COVID-19 syndrome cohort. J. Med. 
Virol. 94 (3), 1027–1034.
Oertel, F.C., et al., 2021. Retinal optical coherence tomography in neuromyelitis optica. 
Neurol. Neuroimmunol. Neuroinflamm. 8 (6).
Oren, B., et al., 2021. Quantitative assessment of retinal changes in COVID-19 patients. 
Clin. Exp. Optom. 104 (6), 717–722.
Ozturk, M., et al., 2025. Long-term effects of COVID-19 on optic disc and retinal 
microvasculature assessed by optical coherence tomography angiography. 
Diagnostics 15 (1).
Pandian, K., et al., 2025. Microvessels-on-chip: exploring endothelial cells and COVID-19 
plasma interaction with nitric oxide metabolites. Nitric Oxide 155, 12–19.
Patrascu, R., 2025. Advances in understanding inflammation and tissue damage: markers 
of persistent sequelae. In: Dumitru, S. (Ed.), COVID-19 Patients. J. Clin. Med.
Patton, N., et al., 2005. Retinal vascular image analysis as a potential screening tool for 
cerebrovascular disease: a rationale based on homology between cerebral and retinal 
microvasculatures. J. Anat. 206 (4), 319–348.
Santoro, L., et al., 2023. Role of endothelium in cardiovascular sequelae of long COVID. 
Biomedicines 11 (8).
Schlick, S., et al., 2022. Post-COVID-19 syndrome: retinal microcirculation as a potential 
marker for chronic fatigue. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (22).
Soriano, J.B., et al., 2022. A clinical case definition of post-COVID-19 condition by a 
Delphi consensus. Lancet Infect. Dis. 22 (4), e102–e107.
Sotzny, F., et al., 2022. Dysregulated autoantibodies targeting vaso- and 
immunoregulatory receptors in post COVID syndrome correlate with symptom 
severity. Front. Immunol. 13, 981532.
Staub, K., Ballouz, T., Puhan, M., 2024. An unwanted but long-known company: post- 
viral symptoms in the context of past pandemics in Switzerland (and beyond). Public 
Health Rev. 45, 1606966.
Stein, E., et al., 2025. Efficacy of repeated immunoadsorption in patients with post- 
COVID myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and elevated β2- 
adrenergic receptor autoantibodies: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Reg. Health 
Eur. 49, 101161.
Szewczykowski, C., et al., 2022. Long COVID: association of functional autoantibodies 
against G-Protein-Coupled receptors with an impaired retinal microcirculation. Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 23 (13).
Talebnejad, M.R., et al., 2025. Analysis of retinal sublayers in patients with systemic 
COVID-19 illness with varying degrees of severity. Sci. Rep. 15 (1), 2877.
Tewarie, P., et al., 2012. The OSCAR-IB consensus criteria for retinal OCT quality 
assessment. PLoS One 7 (4), e34823.
Turker, I.C., et al., 2021. Optical coherence tomography angiography findings in patients 
with COVID-19. Can. J. Ophthalmol. 56 (2), 83–87.
Turker, I.C., et al., 2022. Evaluation of early and late COVID-19-induced vascular 
changes with OCTA. Can. J. Ophthalmol. 57 (4), 236–241.
Varga, Z., et al., 2020. Endothelial cell infection and endotheliitis in COVID-19. Lancet 
395 (10234), 1417–1418.
Vlaicu, S.I., et al., 2023. COVID, complement, and the brain. Front. Immunol. 14, 
1216457.
Wallukat, G., et al., 2021. Functional autoantibodies against G-protein coupled receptors 
in patients with persistent Long-COVID-19 symptoms. J. Transl. Autoimmun. 4, 
100100.
Wicklein, R., et al., 2023. The OSCAR-MP consensus criteria for quality assessment of 
retinal optical coherence tomography angiography. Neurol. Neuroimmunol. 
Neuroinflamm. 10 (6).
Xu, S.W., Ilyas, I., Weng, J.P., 2023. Endothelial dysfunction in COVID-19: an overview 
of evidence, biomarkers, mechanisms and potential therapies. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 
44 (4), 695–709.
Ye, G., et al., 2024. Anti-HBc mirrors the activation of HBV-specific CD8. Antivir. Res. 
230, 105975.
Zapata, M., et al., 2022. Retinal microvascular abnormalities in patients after COVID-19 
depending on disease severity. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 106 (4), 559–563.
M. Wunderle et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Brain, Behavior, & Immunity - Health 56 (2026) 101315 
12 
