Academic Editor: Natalia V. Gulyaeva
Received: 21 July 2026
Revised: 13 August 2026
Accepted: 17 August 2026
Published: 21 August 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
Cognition-Linked Monocyte State Reveals Altered
Myeloid–Lymphoid Coordination in Neuro-PASC
Barbara A. Hanson 1
, Andrew C. Cogswell 2
, Melissa Lopez 1, Janet Miller 3, Kristen L. Knutson 1
,
Mercedes R. Carnethon 4
and Igor J. Koralnik 1,*
1
Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA; barbara.hanson@northwestern.edu (B.A.H.);
melissa.lopez@northwestern.edu (M.L.); kristen.knutson@northwestern.edu (K.L.K.)
2
Department of Immunology-Microbiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA; andrew.cogswell@northwestern.edu
3
Northwestern Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; jmiller@nm.org
4
Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA; carnethon@northwestern.edu
*
Correspondence: igor.koralnik@northwestern.edu
Abstract
Neurologic manifestations of long COVID, also called neurologic post-acute sequelae of
SARS-CoV-2 infection (Neuro-PASC: NP) include persistent alteration of cognitive func-
tions. We investigated whether these could be driven by immune perturbations. We
combined flow cytometry (FC), sleep profiling, and single-cell RNA sequencing of periph-
eral blood immune cells from older adult (>55 years) individuals with and without NP to
evaluate relationships with objective cognitive performance. NP participants showed re-
duced numbers of blood monocytes with increased mitochondrial superoxide, indicating an
altered monocyte mitochondrial redox state. Higher peripheral capillary oxygen saturation
(SpO2) was associated with better processing speed in NP participants. Monocyte transcrip-
tional analyses identified mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase/Complex
V (Complex V) pathway associated with cognitive performance in people without NP; this
coupling was abrogated in NP patients, in whom cognitive performance instead showed
an opposite relationship with Complex V. Shared leading-edge genes defined a 13-gene
monocyte anchor representing this cognition-associated NP phenotype. Higher anchor
scores were associated with coordinated oxidative phosphorylation and cytotoxic programs
across CD3+ T-cell subsets in individuals without NP, but not in NP participants. T-cell
receptor stratified analyses showed that this altered relationship occurred in both expanded
and unexpanded T-cell populations. FC correlations also supported reduced monocyte-
to-lymphocyte mitochondrial coordination in NP. These exploratory findings identify a
sleep and cognition-linked monocyte mitochondrial phenotype characterized by altered
myeloid–lymphoid immune coordination in NP.
Keywords: post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC); long COVID; oxidative
phosphorylation; OXPHOS; Complex V; ATP synthase; Neuro-PASC
1. Introduction
Long COVID, also termed post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC), re-
mains a substantial global health problem. The cumulative global burden was estimated to
have reached approximately 400 million individuals worldwide by the end of 2023, with an
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
2 of 23
annual detrimental economic impact approaching $1 trillion [1]. PASC can affect multiple
organ systems, and neurologic manifestations are among the most debilitating and include
‘brain fog’, cognitive dysfunction, headache, dizziness, sleep disturbance, and intense
fatigue [2]. Neuro-PASC (NP) can occur after mild acute infection, and symptoms may
persist for years. Age is known to influence the clinical presentation of NP, where younger
and middle-aged adults are more severely affected, with few studies dedicated to older
adults [3]. Characterizing the physiologic and immune processes associated with cognitive
symptoms in this population is therefore necessary to identify potential mechanisms and
targets for intervention.
Sleep disturbance is common in NP, but objective evaluations of sleep physiology re-
main relatively sparse. Polysomnography in adults with chronic insomnia after COVID-19
has demonstrated reduced sleep efficiency and prolonged wake after sleep onset [4]. More
recently, adults with long COVID were found to have significantly lower average average
peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) after sleep onset and during rapid eye movement
(REM) than sleep-matched controls [5]. These measurements describe distinct compo-
nents of sleep physiology, with mean and minimum SpO2 quantifying different features of
oxygenation, while the apnea-hypopnea index and oxygen desaturation index measure
respiratory events rather than oxygenation itself. Direct evidence linking objective noc-
turnal oxygenation to objective cognitive performance in PASC remains limited. A pilot
study of supplemental oxygen found no overall improvement in cognitive performance,
though cerebral perfusion and oxygenation have been associated with attention and day-
time sleepiness after COVID-19 [6]. The relationship among objective sleep physiology,
cognition, and systemic immune abnormalities which have been observed in NP is therefore
poorly understood.
Mitochondrial and persistent immune abnormalities may contribute to neurologic
symptoms following SARS-CoV-2 infection. During acute infection, SARS-CoV-2 expo-
sure can promote mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS)-dependent glycolytic
reprogramming in monocytes, while circulating monocytes from patients with COVID-19
pneumonia have shown impaired oxygen usage, altered mitochondrial membrane potential,
and abnormal morphology [7,8]. Evidence of metabolic alteration following the acute phase
is inconsistent. Bulk peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from individuals with
PASC have demonstrated increased basal, adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-linked, maximal,
and spare respiratory capacity, whereas other studies have identified increased oxygen
consumption accompanied by abnormal membrane potential or impaired monocyte adap-
tation to oxidative stress and mitochondrial DNA depletion [9–11]. Our group previously
found that COX7A1 in plasma, an oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)-associated pro-
tein, was elevated in NP and associated with worse recovery, fatigue, subjective cognition,
processing speed, and attention [12]. COX7A1 also showed an inverse relationship with
other OXPHOS-associated plasma proteins in NP but a positive relationship in COVID
convalescent controls (CCs). These findings support mitochondrial involvement in NP
but do not identify the cellular source of the plasma proteins, establish whether this is
associated with increased or decreased mitochondrial activity, or define how mitochondrial
programs relate across immune cell compartments.
Studies in acute COVID-19 have identified metabolic abnormalities in myeloid and
lymphoid populations measured within the same cohorts, including mitochondrial dys-
function and apoptotic susceptibility in T cells together with metabolically altered myeloid
populations [13,14]. Given that mitochondrial and metabolic abnormalities have been
identified in both myeloid and lymphoid populations following SARS-CoV-2 infection,
it is important to consider how these compartments function in relation to one another.
Myeloid and lymphoid lineages contribute complementary roles in immune activation,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
3 of 23
regulation, and resolution, yet little is known about how their metabolic programs vary to-
gether in chronic NP. We therefore combined flow cytometry (FC), objective sleep profiling,
standardized cognitive testing, and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to examine
mitochondrial immune phenotypes in older adults with and without NP. We evaluated
whether objective sleep parameters and cognitive performance were associated with cellular
transcription patterns and whether the cellular phenotypes showed different relationships
across groups, and finally whether these were associated with SARS-CoV-2-responsive or
expanded T-cell populations.
2. Results
2.1. Study Subjects
A total of 62 participants were included in analyses using flow cytometry (FC; n = 19),
a sleep profiler (n = 43), and/or single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq; n = 11). NP
was defined as persistent neurologic symptoms following acute SARS-CoV-2 infection
that lasted at least 3 months and remained active at the time of sample collection. All
participants presented with mild COVID-19 during acute infection and did not require
hospitalization for pneumonia or hypoxemia; this restriction was intended to limit the
confounding effects of poor oxygenation and complications of severe acute disease. In the
FC analysis, NP participants were compared with convalescent controls (CCs), defined
as individuals with prior SARS-CoV-2 infection who did not report persistent post-acute
symptoms. In the sleep profiler and scRNA-seq analyses, participants in the Study of
Disparities in Sleep and Cognition in Older Adults (DISCO) with NP were designated the
DISCO NP (DNP) group, whereas the non-NP subjects enrolled under the DISCO protocol
(nonDNP) comparison group included both convalescent controls and individuals without
documented SARS-CoV-2 infection who reported no known history of COVID-19.
Participant samples were therefore used for either FC analyses, comparing NP and
CC participants, or sleep profiler/scRNA-seq analyses, comparing DNP and nonDNP
participants. Groups were age- and sex-matched both within each arm and across the
overall study group (Table 1).
Cognitive and quality-of-life (QoL) measures were assessed using the NIH Toolbox and
the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS), respectively.
These measures were available for both groups in the sleep profiler/scRNA-seq analysis
and for NP participants only in the FC analysis. Objective NIH Toolbox cognitive perfor-
mance was similar among all participants tested, whereas the PROMIS measures showed
significantly greater subjective alterations of QoL in domains of cognition, fatigue, sleep
disturbance, and anxiety burden in DNP participants compared with nonDNP controls.
2.2. NP Is Associated with Reduced Circulating Monocytes and Increased Monocyte
Mitochondrial Superoxide
Previous studies have reported alterations in peripheral immune signatures in patients
after COVID-19, including significant alterations in mitochondrial respiration [15,16]. To
address whether these alterations were persistent in NP patients, flow cytometry was
performed on isolated PBMCs from NP patients and CC participants to identify whether
there were alterations in immune subpopulations. Immune cells were identified via the
gating strategy shown in Figure 1A.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
4 of 23
Table 1. Demographics.
Flow Cytometry Participants
scRNA-seq Participants
Overall
NP
CC
p-Value
Overall
DNP
nonDNP
p-Value
p-Value DNP vs.
NP
n
19
10
9
11
5
6
Age, years (mean (1SD))
60.9 (9.6)
64.5 (5.8)
56.9 (11.6)
0.08
63.1 (6.0)
65 (3.1)
63 (7.9)
0.61
Gender, n (%)
Male
9 (47.4)
5 (50)
4 (44.4)
1
6 (54.5)
3 (60)
3 (50)
1
1
Female
10 (52.6)
5 (50)
5 (55.6)
5 (45.5)
2 (40)
3 (50)
Race, n (%)
White/Caucasian
15 (78.9)
7 (70)
8 (88.9)
1
9 (81.8)
5 (100)
4 (66.7)
0.455
1
Black or African American
1 (5.3)
1 (10)
0 (0)
2 (18.2)
0 (0)
2 (33.3)
Multiracial
1 (5.3)
1 (10)
0 (0)
Other
1 (5.3)
0 (0)
1 (11.1)
Not specified *
1 (5.3)
1 (10)
0 (0)
Ethnicity, n (%)
Not Hispanic or Latino
18 (94.7)
9 (90)
9 (100)
1
10 (90.9)
5 (100)
4 (66.7)
1
1
Hispanic or Latino
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
1 (9.1)
0 (0)
1 (16.7)
Not Specified *
1 (5.3)
1 (10)
0 (0)
1 (16.7)
Toolbox
Attention
45 (37–50)
50 (41–51)
42 (36.5–50.5)
50.5 (46–57)
0.100
0.806
Processing Speed
47 (40–56)
59 (40–66)
40 (33–64.5)
61.5 (50–66)
0.273
0.668
Executive Function
43 (39–61)
66 (47–73)
58 (46.5–68.5)
69.5 (66–73)
0.361
0.198
Working Memory
50 (44–53)
54 (50–67)
53 (49.5–62.5)
56 (50–71)
0.583
0.126
PROMIS
Cognition
36.7 (29–43.9)
40.1 (34.2–47.4)
34.2 (27.8–35)
46.6 (41.5–48.9)
0.006
0.306
Anxiety
57.9 (53.9–67)
57.7 (51.2–64)
64 (56–69.3)
51.2 (46–57.7)
0.028
0.341
Depression
58.1 (50.5–63.9)
56 (46.1–64)
58.9 (54.5–66.5)
46.9 (34.2–57.5)
0.100
0.421
Fatigue
65.5 (59.8–69.5)
57 (47.3–73.9)
73.9 (61.6–77.3)
48.7 (39.1–57.0)
0.011
0.272
Sleep Disturbance
57.5 (47.3–65)
54.3 (49.2–60)
60 (53.6–68.6)
53.9 (46.3–54.3)
0.045
0.558
MoCA
27 (26–28)
28 (26–28.5)
26.5 (26–28)
0.315
* Not Specified indicates that race or ethnicity information was not available in the source study records used for this analysis. Bold values indicate p < 0.05.
Gray squares indicate that measurements were not collected. NP: NeuroPASC; CC-COVID Convalescent; scRNA-seq: single-cell RNA sequencing; DNP: DISCO
Neuro-PASC: nonDNP- DISCO non-NeuroPASC; SD: Stamdard Deviation; PROMIS: Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System; MoCA: Montreal
Cognitive Assessment.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
5 of 23
Figure 1. Alterations in peripheral immune cells of patients with NP. (A) Representative flow cytome-
try gating strategy for immune cell populations. Samples were first gated on the cellular population
(cells), then subdivided based on size and granularity into either lymphocytes or monocytes. Both
were then gated for singlet, living cells, while T cells were gated based on CD3 expression (T cells),
then CD4 (CD4) and CD8 (CD8) expression, and finally CD4+ T cells were then gated based on CD127
and CD25 expression to identify regulatory T cells (Tregs). Monocytes were further gated based
on the expression of CD14 and CD16. (B) Relative frequency of total monocytes (left panel) and
monocyte subpopulations (right panel) based on flow gating strategy in A in NP and CC patients.
(C) Geometric mean fluorescence intensity (gMFI) of mtROS staining in monocytes and monocyte
subpopulations in NP and CC patients. (D) Relative frequency of total T cells (left panel), CD4+ and
CD8+ (middle panel), and CD4+ Tregs (right panel) based on gating strategy in A in NP and CC
patients. (E) gMFI of mtROS staining of total T cells (left panel), CD4+ and CD8+ (middle panel),
and CD4+ Tregs (right panel) in NP and CC patients. Each dot represents an individual patient,
n = 9 for NP patients and n = 10 for CC patients. Statistical tests were performed utilizing Mann–
Whitney U or 2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) where appropriate; p values are shown above the
compared populations.
NP patients showed a significant reduction in the frequency of monocytes compared to
CC participants (7.3% ± 5.9% vs. 13.1% ± 8.0%, p = 0.0435; Leave-one-out [LOO] NP−CC
difference = −5.87% to −4.62 percentage points, p = 0.0085–0.0831) (Figure 1B). While
the frequency of total monocytes was reduced among NP patients, there were no specific
alterations to the frequency of any one subpopulation, as both the percentage of CD14+
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
6 of 23
CD16−and the CD14int/−CD16+ subpopulations showed no alterations compared to CC
patients (Figure 1B).
We investigated whether alterations in the frequency of monocytes in NP patients
could be associated with any other phenotypic variation. Increases in mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (mtROS) have been shown to lead to increased apoptosis and
inflammation in monocytes and can be associated with autoimmune conditions [17,18].
Notably, active SARS-CoV-2 infection has been shown to increase mtROS in monocytes [7].
To determine whether NP patients had persistent increases in mtROS, we stained cells
with MitoSOX and analyzed them via FC. We found that monocytes from patients with
NP had increased mtROS (p = 0.0433; LOO NP−CC difference = 178.0–277.5 mean fluo-
rescent intensity (MFI), p = 0.0142–0.0831) (Figure 1C). At the subpopulation level, CD14+
CD16−monocytes had a statistically significant increase in mtROS (p = 0.0309; LOO
NP−CC difference = 177.1–335.3 MFI, p = 0.0133–0.1084), while CD14int/−CD16+ mono-
cytes showed a trend towards an increase in mtROS staining (Figure 1C). In summary, the
data show that NP patients have a decreased frequency of circulating monocytes and that
these monocytes show an increase in mtROS compared to monocytes from CC participants.
In parallel, we examined the phenotypes of T cells. Alterations in T cells in the acute
phase of infection [19,20] and T-cell dysfunction in long COVID have been well docu-
mented [21,22]. We first examined whether there were any alterations observed in the rela-
tive frequency of T cells in NP patients compared to CC individuals. We found that while
there was no statistically significant reduction in total CD3+ T cells compared to CC partici-
pants, there was a reduction in frequency of CD4+ T cells in NP patients (p = 0.0135; LOO
NP−CC difference = −15.39 to −9.87 percentage points, p = 0.00069–0.0262; Figure 1D).
Given that alterations in CD4+ T-cell frequency are associated with increased inflam-
mation and pathology, we next investigated if there was also a decrease in regulatory T cells
(Tregs), a subset of CD4+ T cells which contribute to the control of inflammation. The fre-
quency of Tregs was decreased in NP patients compared to CC individuals (4.93% ± 2.30%
vs. 6.66% ± 1.93%) but this did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.075) (Figure 1E).
Similar to the metabolic alterations in monocytes, alterations in T-cell metabolism have been
widely reported in the context of COVID-19 [14,23]. In NP patients, we observed trends
towards increases mtROS in CD4+ T cells and specifically within the Treg compartment,
yet none of these reached statistical significance (Figure 1E). Taken together, these data
demonstrate a decrease in the relative proportion of CD4+ T cells in NP patients with a
trend towards a decrease in peripheral Treg cells. Furthermore, there is a trend towards an
increase in mtROS in bulk CD4+ T cells and Treg cells.
Flow cytometry therefore identified a predominantly monocyte-altered phenotype
in NP, characterized by reduced circulating monocyte frequency and increased monocyte
mtROS, with more limited changes in CD3+ T-cell abundance or mtROS signal from
those cells.
2.3. Higher Minimum SpO2 Is Associated with Better Processing Speed Performance in NP
To further characterize the relationship between sleep physiology and cognitive per-
formance, we first analyzed objective sleep measurements in the full DISCO cohort (n = 43;
DNP, n = 20; nonDNP, n = 23). We examined whether objective sleep physiology was
associated with cognitive performance in the full DISCO cohort (n = 43; Table 1). De-
spite larger group differences in subjective measures of cognition, we prioritized NIH
Toolbox scores for downstream transcriptional analyses because they provide standard-
ized, performance-based measures of cognition. NIH Toolbox processing speed, attention,
executive function, and working memory scores were analyzed separately. Pearson cor-
relations between each sleep parameter and individual NIH Toolbox cognitive domains
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
7 of 23
were calculated separately within the DNP and nonDNP groups (Figure 2A). Among DNP
participants, REM sleep percentage was negatively correlated with executive function
(r = −0.53, p = 0.016). Minimum SpO2 was positively correlated with processing speed in
DNP participants (r = 0.40, p = 0.080) and negatively correlated with processing speed in
nonDNP participants (r = −0.36, p = 0.100); the unadjusted regression slopes differed sig-
nificantly between groups (p = 0.013) (Figure 2B). The sleep efficiency–attention slopes also
differed between groups (p = 0.038; LOO slope difference = 1.59–2.27, p = 0.0037–0.0489);
corresponding plots for the remaining sleep parameters are shown in Figure S1.
Figure 2. Sleep parameters associated with cognition and monocyte transcriptional programs in DNP
and nonDNP participants. (A) Pearson correlations between Sleep Profiler parameters and individual
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
8 of 23
NIH Toolbox cognitive domains. Color indicates Pearson correlation coefficient, and asterisks
indicate nominal p < 0.05. (B) Associations between minimum SpO2 and individual NIH Toolbox
cognitive domains. Point position in the DNP and nonDNP panels indicates the within-group Pearson
correlation coefficient. The DNP–nonDNP panel shows the difference in unadjusted regression
slopes with 95% confidence intervals; asterisks indicate a nominally significant difference in slopes
(p < 0.05). (C) Monocyte GSEA after ranking genes by association with the SpO2-linked cognition
within each group for participants with matched scRNA-seq, Sleep Profiler, and NIH Toolbox
data. Point position indicates NES, point size indicates absolute NES, and point color indicates
adjusted p value; white points indicate adjusted p ≥0.05. The red box highlights the MitoCarta
Complex V pathway selected for downstream analyses. Truncated pathway labels: BTM: myeloid
cell enriched receptors and transporters (M4.3); BTM: regulation of antigen presentation and immune
response (M5.0). AHI: apnea-hypopnea index; ODI3: 3% oxygen desaturation index; RDI: respiratory
disturbance index; NREM3: stage N3 non-rapid eye movement sleep; REM: rapid eye movement;
SpO2: peripheral oxygen saturation; M: MitoCarta; BTM: blood transcription module; GSEA: gene
set enrichment analysis; NES: normalized enrichment score; OXPHOS: oxidative phosphorylation.
We next examined the 11-participant scRNA-seq subset of the DISCO cohort (DNP,
n = 5; nonDNP, n = 6) to identify immune transcriptional programs associated with sleep
physiology and cognitive performance. We identified immune transcriptional programs
associated with sleep physiology and processing speed by analyzing scRNA-seq data
using reference-based cell annotation. Unsupervised dimensional reduction was strongly
influenced by donor-specific variability, therefore cells were annotated using SingleR with
the MonacoImmuneData immune reference atlas. CD3+ T-cell and non-CD3-expressing
immune cell populations were analyzed separately, and CD3+ T cells underwent additional
reference-based annotation to obtain finer subtype labels. Downstream analyses were
restricted to immune lineages represented by at least 50 cells in at least three donors from
both groups. Annotated cells per participant are shown in Figure S2.
Since minimum SpO2 showed a group-specific association with processing speed,
we investigated whether minimum SpO2 was associated with monocyte transcriptional
programs. Within each group, monocyte genes were ranked by their association with
minimum SpO2 for gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). This analysis identified group-
specific SpO2-associated transcriptional programs. In nonDNP participants, minimum
SpO2 was strongly associated with OXPHOS-related transcriptional pathways, including
ATP synthase/Complex V (Complex V). In DNP participants, this association with the
Complex V transcriptional pathway was not observed, despite enrichment of other immune
and mitochondrial annotations (Figure 2C).
2.4. Complex V Gene Expression Shows an Opposite Cognition-Associated Relationship in DNP
and nonDNP Monocytes
Within the 11-participant scRNA-seq cohort, we next identified monocyte gene pro-
grams associated with cognitive performance. We modeled NIH Toolbox performance
as described above as the phenotype and participant-level monocyte mean-positive gene
expression as the input. Associations were evaluated using linear mixed-effects models,
with attention, executive function, processing speed, and working memory scores included
as repeated domain-level outcomes, cognitive domain included as a fixed effect, and par-
ticipant included as a random intercept. Genes were ranked by their association with
cognitive performance using the signed t statistic for gene expression and evaluated by
GSEA (Figure 3A). Pseudobulk screening identified one monocyte profile, DNP10, that
exceeded the robust Mahalanobis distance screening threshold; this sample was retained
as there were no abnormalities in donor technical quality control (QC) metrics (robust
Mahalanobis d2 = 73.20, cutoff = 9.35; 0/5 technical-QC metrics flagged).
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
9 of 23
Figure 3. Monocyte Complex V shows opposite cognition-associated relationships in DNP and
nonDNP participants. (A) GSEA results for selected (top 20 by DNP NES) monocyte pathways
after ranking genes by association with objective cognition across NIH Toolbox domains. Point
position indicates NES, point size indicates absolute NES, and point color indicates adjusted p
value. The red box highlights the MitoCarta Complex V pathway selected for downstream analyses.
White points indicate pathways that did not meet the indicated FDR threshold. (B) Heatmap of
Pearson correlation coefficients between mean-positive monocyte expression of shared Complex V
leading-edge genes and NIH Toolbox and PROMIS domain scores in DNP and nonDNP participants.
Asterisks indicate Pearson p < 0.05. Truncated pathway label: BTM: myeloid cell enriched receptors
and transporters (M4.3). M: MitoCarta; BTM: blood transcription module; H: Hallmark; GOBP:
Gene Ontology Biological Process; GSEA: gene set enrichment analysis; NES: normalized enrichment
score; FDR: false discovery rate; PROMIS: patient-reported outcomes measurement information
system; OXPHOS: oxidative phosphorylation; TB: Toolbox; ATT: attention; EF: executive function;
PS: processing speed; WM: working memory.
GSEA of cognition-ranked genes identified significant enrichment of multiple
OXPHOS-related transcriptional pathways in DNP monocytes, with higher Complex V
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
10 of 23
gene expression in monocytes associated with lower cognitive performance. Complex V
was positively enriched along the SpO2-cognition axis in nonDNP subjects but absent from
the corresponding DNP sleep-cognition analysis; we therefore asked whether the absence
of this transcriptional association reflected a differing relationship between Complex V
expression and cognition in NP. We compared the leading-edge genes from the nonDNP
SpO2-linked cognition Complex V signal with those from the DNP cognition-associated
Complex V signal. Thirteen genes were shared between the nonDNP SpO2-linked cog-
nition Complex V leading edge and the DNP cognition-associated Complex V leading
edge (ATP5F1A, ATP5F1B, ATP5F1D, ATP5F1E, ATP5IF1, ATP5MC3, ATP5MD, ATP5MF,
ATP5MPL, ATP5PB, ATP5PD, DMAC2L, and FMC1; complete leading-edge lists for both
GSEA analyses available as Table S1). These genes were designated the “monocyte anchor”
because they comprised the overlapping Complex V leading-edge genes identified in the
SpO2-linked processing speed and cognition-associated monocyte analyses, and therefore
represented the monocyte phenotype associated with changes in cognition in DNP. Subject-
level anchor scores were then calculated from the mean-positive expression of these genes
in monocytes for use in subsequent analyses.
We additionally examined the Complex V anchor genes against the individual objec-
tive Toolbox and subjective PROMIS domains. Pearson correlations (Figure 3B) between
mean-positive monocyte expression of the 13 overlapping Complex V leading-edge genes
showed a coherent DNP-enriched pattern, with anchor genes generally tracking worse
cognitive domain performance and higher PROMIS symptom burden, particularly anxiety-
related measures. In contrast, nonDNP participants showed weaker and less consistent
domain-level relationships, with some associations involving lower PROMIS symptom
scores consistent with an NP-associated relationship between monocyte Complex V tran-
scription and the cognitive burden experienced in NP. Monocyte anchor z-scores were
highly stable to individual participant omission (LOO Spearman ρ = 1.00 for all omissions;
minimum Pearson r > 0.9998; maximum absolute score change = 0.181).
2.5. Monocyte Complex V Gene Expression Correlates with Altered Coordination with CD3+
T-Cell Transcriptional Programs
Within the same 11-participant scRNA-seq cohort, we then investigated whether the
cognition-associated monocyte phenotype was accompanied by altered transcriptional
programs in CD3+ T cells. The monocyte anchor score was therefore used as a continuous
variable to evaluate CD3+ T-cell gene-expression patterns across participants. Within each
CD3+ T-cell subset, genes were ranked by their association with the monocyte anchor
separately in DNP and nonDNP participants, followed by GSEA. In nonDNP participants,
increasing monocyte anchor scores were associated with broadly positive enrichment of
OXPHOS, OXPHOS subunit, core cytotoxic gene expression, and interferon gamma (IFNg)
programs across CD3+ T-cell lineages (Figure 4A). In DNP participants, however, these
relationships were less consistent and varied across pathways as well as CD3+ T-cell subsets,
with weaker or negative OXPHOS enrichment in several lineages. These findings indicate
that the monocyte anchor tracked with coordinated OXPHOS- and effector-related transcrip-
tional programs in CD3+ T cells in nonDNP participants, whereas this cross-compartment
relationship was altered or lost in DNP. No participant-level multivariate outliers were
identified in the T-cell pseudobulk profiles (0/11 participants flagged; maximum robust
Mahalanobis d2 = 5.02, cutoff = 7.38).
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
11 of 23
Figure 4. The monocyte Complex V anchor is linked to divergent CD3+ T-cell transcriptional programs
in DNP and nonDNP participants. (A) Heatmap of CD3+ T-cell lineage-specific GSEA normalized
enrichment scores (NES) for OXPHOS, OXPHOS subunits, cytotoxicity, and IFNg response after
ranking genes by association with the monocyte Complex V anchor within each group. Asterisks
indicate adjusted p < 0.05. (B) TcR-stratified DNP versus nonDNP GSEA for OXPHOS. Positive NES
indicates gene enrichment higher in DNP. (C) TcR-stratified GSEA performed within each group after
ranking genes by association with the monocyte OXPHOS anchor. Significant DNP enrichments are
shown in red, nonDNP enrichments are shown in blue, nonsignificant enrichments in black, and gray
points indicate bins with fewer than four subjects. Larger points indicate adjusted p < 0.05.
To determine whether this altered monocyte–lymphocyte relationship could be at-
tributed to adaptive immune responses established during acute SARS-CoV-2 infection
as compared to a pan-lymphocytic resting state, we integrated T-cell receptor (TcR) an-
notations with the CD3+ T-cell single-cell data. Direct DNP vs. nonDNP GSEA, without
accounting for the monocyte anchor, showed greater OXPHOS enrichment in DNP T cells
(Figure 4B). In contrast, when genes were ranked by their association with the monocyte
anchor within each group, nonDNP participants showed coordinated positive OXPHOS
enrichment of CD3+ T cells, whereas DNP participants showed little or inconsistent T-cell
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
12 of 23
OXPHOS enrichment (Figure 4C). This pattern was observed in both expanded and unex-
panded T-cell populations, indicating that the altered monocyte–lymphocyte relationship
in DNP was not restricted to clonally expanded or predicted antigen-specific cells.
2.6. Flow Cytometry Supports Altered Monocyte–Lymphocyte Mitochondrial Coordination in NP
Finally, we asked whether the altered monocyte–lymphocyte OXPHOS-related tran-
scriptional relationships observed in the scRNA-seq analyses were also reflected in the
independent flow cytometry cohort. Spearman correlation analysis of monocyte MitoSOX
MFI from lymphocyte and myeloid lineages showed significant positive associations be-
tween monocyte mtROS and CD3, CD4, and Treg MitoSOX signal in CC participants,
which were absent in NP participants (Figure 5A,B). In contrast, the inverse association
between CD16+ monocyte mtROS and CD14+ mtROS frequency within the myeloid com-
partment was stronger in NP, while associations with CD8 MitoSOX were weaker in both
groups. These findings support a model in which NP cognitive changes are characterized
by increased monocyte mitochondrial stress and an altered mitochondrial transcriptional
association between monocytes and lymphocyte compartments.
Figure 5. Monocyte–lymphocyte mitochondrial associations differ between CCand NP. (A) Spearman
correlations between monocyte MitoSOX mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) and the indicated flow
cytometric features in NP (red) and CC (blue) participants. Positive monocyte vs. lymphocyte
mitochondrial associations with CD3, CD4, and Treg MitoSOX MFI were stronger in CC, whereas
the inverse association with CD16 MitoSOX MFI within the myeloid compartment was stronger in
NP. The CD8 association was weaker in both groups. Dashed line at rho = 0. (B) Summary table of
Spearman ρ and adjusted p values for panel (A). Bold values and large circles indicate padj < 0.05.
padj: Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value.
3. Discussion
In this study, we identified a monocyte-centered mitochondrial phenotype and reduced
coordination between monocyte and lymphocyte mitochondrial programs in adults over
the age of 55 with NP. FC showed reduced circulating monocyte abundance together with
increased monocyte mtROS in participants with NP. Among DNP participants, minimum
SpO2 was positively associated with objective cognitive performance. In monocytes, ATP
synthase/Complex V pathways were associated with both minimum SpO2 and cognition,
and the shared leading-edge genes from these analyses defined a 13-gene monocyte anchor.
Increasing anchor scores were accompanied by broadly positive OXPHOS enrichment
across CD3+ T-cell populations in nonDNP participants, whereas this relationship was
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
13 of 23
weaker or absent in DNP. The same pattern was observed in expanded and unexpanded T-
cell populations, and FC correlations provided orthogonal support for reduced coordination
between monocyte and lymphocyte mitochondrial programs in NP.
The association between minimum SpO2 and objective cognitive performance adds
to existing evidence that sleep physiology and oxygenation remain altered in some indi-
viduals with long COVID/PASC. In a preliminary polysomnography study, adults with
PASC had modestly lower average SpO2 after sleep onset and during REM sleep than
controls, including after controlling for apnea [5]. Additional studies have identified al-
tered sleep architecture or a higher burden of disordered sleep breathing in selected PASC
populations [4]. However, direct evidence linking nocturnal oxygenation to cognitive
symptoms associated with PASC remains limited to date. Trials of supplemental oxygen
found no overall improvement in cognitive performance [24]. Altered cerebral perfusion
and oxygenation have also been related to measures of cognition such as attention as well
as fatigue associated with PASC, but while these central nervous system (CNS) measures
may be related to peripheral SpO2, they remain distinct. Our findings therefore suggest
that nighttime hypoxemia as measured by minimum SpO2 may prove relevant to cognitive
performance in Neuro-PASC.
Our monocyte findings are consistent with growing evidence that SARS-CoV-2 infec-
tion is accompanied by substantial mitochondrial and metabolic remodeling in circulating
immune cells. During acute infection, SARS-CoV-2 exposure can promote mtROS and HIF-
1α-dependent glycolytic reprogramming in monocytes, supporting inflammatory cytokine
production and impairing T-cell responses [7]. Circulating monocytes from patients with
COVID-19 pneumonia have also shown mitochondrial effects such as reduced basal and
maximal respiration, diminished spare respiratory capacity, depolarization, and abnormal
morphology [8].
These acute studies establish that monocytes metabolically respond to SARS-CoV-2
infection, but the relevance to PASC remains less well understood, with studies showing
inconsistent effects. Bulk PBMCs from individuals with PASC have shown increased
basal, ATP-linked, maximal, and spare respiratory capacity compared with recovered and
naive controls [9–11]. Conversely, a small study of monocytes from participants with
cardiovascular symptoms of PASC identified impaired respiratory adaptation to oxidative
challenge, abnormal membrane potential, and decreased mitochondrial DNA. Collectively,
these works support persistent mitochondrial remodeling in PASC monocytes but do not
define a single uniform state of increased or decreased mitochondrial activity.
This distinction is particularly important for interpreting the OXPHOS and related
Complex V enrichment observed in our scRNA-seq analyses. Enrichment of OXPHOS
transcripts does not directly measure oxygen consumption, ATP production, respiratory
coupling, mitochondrial mass, substrate preference, or spare respiratory capacity. Prior
studies suggest that increased oxygen consumption can coexist with abnormal membrane
potential or impaired adaptation to oxidative stress [9–11]. Thus, the cognition-associated
monocyte phenotype identified here should be directly measured before determining
the functional effects of these findings. The concurrent elevation of monocyte MitoSOX
fluorescence supports an altered mitochondrial redox state, but direct measurements, such
as Seahorse, will be needed to determine whether the transcriptional program represents
increased respiratory activity, compensatory remodeling, inefficient respiration, or another
response to mitochondrial stress.
The central finding here is that the relationship between the monocyte phenotype
and CD3+ T-cell transcriptional programs differed between groups. In nonDNP partici-
pants, increasing anchor scores were accompanied by coordinated positive enrichment of
OXPHOS genes across multiple CD3+ T-cell subsets. In DNP, however, the correspond-
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
14 of 23
ing relationships were weaker, inconsistent, or negative. Paired analyses of myeloid and
lymphoid metabolism remain limited in PASC, but severe acute COVID-19 provides ev-
idence that these compartments can develop distinct metabolic states within the same
inflammatory environment. Thompson et al. identified metabolically abnormal T cells with
mitochondrial dysfunction and susceptibility to apoptosis together with distinct myeloid
suppressor populations in patients with severe COVID-19 [13]. Additionally, Siska et al.
observed disease-stage-dependent abnormalities in mitochondrial substrate uptake, ROS
accumulation, and related gene expression across both T-cell and myeloid populations [14].
Our findings may also reflect a broader transcriptomic signature of bioenergetic stress
response in NP monocytes. Complex V, or mitochondrial ATP synthase, is the terminal
oxidative phosphorylation complex responsible for ATP generation, but increased tran-
scription of its component genes does not necessarily indicate increased ATP synthesis
or more efficient respiration. One possibility is that the inverse relationship between
Complex V-related transcription and cognition reflects compensatory induction of ATP
synthase subunits in monocytes under energetic stress, particularly given the increased
monocyte mtROS observed by FC. This interpretation is consistent with emerging evidence
implicating mitochondrial dysfunction and impaired bioenergetics in PASC. Alternatively,
sustained Complex V-related transcription could reflect maladaptive mitochondrial remod-
eling in which increased expression does not restore normal bioenergetic function, or it
may represent a broader monocyte stress state associated with disease burden. However,
because transcriptional induction does not necessarily indicate increased ATP production,
future studies using direct measures of ATP synthesis will be needed to determine whether
the Complex V alterations reflect compensatory upregulation, impaired ATP generation,
maladaptive remodeling, or a broader stress response.
The results herein do not suggest that monocytes directly regulate T cell metabolism
nor that the observed phenomenon reflects a direct interaction between the two compart-
ments. We instead suggest that monocyte and lymphocyte mitochondrial programs may
respond differently to a shared upstream factor, such as inflammatory mediators, altered
nutrient availability, redox stress, hypoxia, or persistent immune stimulation. Nevertheless,
the broadly positive association observed in nonDNP participants indicates that monocyte
and lymphocyte mitochondrial programs varied together across individuals, whereas this
association was diminished or absent in DNP. The distinction between pathway expression
and transcriptomic coordination is also important. DNP T cells showed higher OXPHOS
enrichment in direct group comparisons while failing to vary in parallel with the mono-
cyte phenotype. Functional assays will be needed to determine how these transcriptional
associations relate to mitochondrial metabolism and cellular function.
The TcR-stratified analyses further showed that the altered relationship was not limited
to clonally expanded T cells. SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8+ T cells and characteristic TcR
clonotypes can persist for at least two years following infection, including in people with
PASC [25]. These findings indicate that this phenomenon is not dependent on SARS-CoV-
2 specificity, and that persistence of antigen-specific T cells does not explain the PASC
phenotype described here. In our study, similar alterations in the anchor relationship
were observed in expanded and unexpanded T-cell populations. This argues against
an explanation restricted to expanded clones but does not exclude contributions from
persistent antigen, bystander activation, or antigen-specific cells not identified by the
available TcR databases. Unexpanded cells should also not be interpreted as uniformly
naïve, resting, or antigen-inexperienced.
The FC analysis provided orthogonal support for altered monocyte–lymphocyte mi-
tochondrial relationships. In a separate group of participants without PASC, monocyte
MitoSOX fluorescence was positively associated with MitoSOX fluorescence in total CD3,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
15 of 23
CD4, and regulatory T-cell populations, whereas these associations were attenuated in NP,
though it is important to note that MitoSOX fluorescence and OXPHOS transcriptional
enrichment measure different aspects of mitochondrial biology. The convergence of the FC
and scRNA-seq analyses supports the broader conclusion that mitochondrial states across
monocyte and lymphocyte compartments were more closely related in participants without
NP than in those with persistent neurologic symptoms.
Limitations
Several limitations should be considered. The analyses are exploratory, and the
scRNA-seq cohort was small, limiting statistical precision and increasing the possibility
that the identified genes and downstream pathway relationships are cohort-specific. Outlier
screening and LOO analyses indicated that the 13-gene monocyte anchor was stable to
individual donor omission, supporting its use as a summary measure of the monocyte
transcriptional phenotype within this cohort. However, the broader finding of altered
coordination between monocyte OXPHOS/Complex V transcriptional programs and T-
cell transcriptional programs, and their connections to cognition, remains exploratory.
Replication in larger, independent cohorts with paired monocyte and lymphocyte transcrip-
tomic data will be important to determine the reproducibility and generalizability of this
cross-compartment relationship.
The Complex V anchor was also defined from overlapping leading-edge genes in
two related analyses: the nonDNP SpO2-linked cognition analysis and the DNP cognition-
associated analysis. Because sleep oxygenation and cognition were associated in this
cohort, these inputs were not fully independent. The resulting anchor should therefore be
interpreted as a shared Complex V transcriptional signature related to the sleep-cognition
relationship, rather than as a marker specific to either hypoxia or cognitive dysfunction
alone. Independent cohorts and longitudinal studies will be needed to determine whether
this monocyte program primarily reflects sleep-related oxygenation, cognitive dysfunction,
or a broader process linking the two.
The CD3+ enrichment procedure represents an additional limitation because the
non-CD3-expressing bystander cells carried through the isolation process may not fully
represent the abundance or diversity of circulating monocytes in the original specimens. Al-
though monocyte abundance was evaluated separately by FC, selection during cell isolation
could have influenced which monocyte states were available for transcriptional analysis. In
addition, although these monocytes were not directly targeted by the CD3 selection reagent,
we cannot exclude transcriptional perturbations associated with ex vivo handling and
passage through the enrichment workflow. The monocyte transcriptional findings should
therefore be interpreted as representing the bystander monocyte population retained during
CD3+ enrichment rather than an unbiased transcriptional profile of circulating monocytes.
Cell annotations were reference-based because unsupervised dimensional reduction was
strongly influenced by donor variability, and some finer immune states may not have been
resolved. This study was also cross-sectional, preventing determination of changes over
time. We therefore cannot establish whether the monocyte phenotype contributes to altered
lymphocyte responses, whether lymphocyte changes influence monocytes, or whether
both arise from a shared upstream process. Finally, pathway enrichment and MitoSOX
fluorescence do not directly measure mitochondrial respiration, ATP production, coupling
efficiency, or substrate use. Future studies of functional outputs should be considered.
Despite these limitations, the distinctive features found here identify altered rela-
tionships between myeloid and lymphoid mitochondrial programs in NP that are associ-
ated with decreased objective cognition. The persistence of this pattern across multiple
CD3+ T-cell subsets, expanded and unexpanded T-cell populations, and an orthogonal
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
16 of 23
FC analysis from a different set of patients suggests a broad alteration in coordination of
mitochondria-associated transcriptional programs across myeloid and lymphoid compart-
ments. Longitudinal studies combining objective sleep measures, cognitive assessment,
paired monocyte and lymphocyte respirometry, metabolomics, and single-cell profiling
will be required to determine the origin, direction, and functional consequences of this
altered coordination.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Study Participants
Adult participants were enrolled through the Northwestern Medicine Neuro-COVID-
19 Clinic and the DISCO study under Northwestern University Institutional Review Board
(IRB) protocol STU00217720. Additional participants were enrolled from the Neuro-COVID-
19 clinic or from the community under Northwestern University IRB protocol STU00212583.
All participants provided written informed consent.
Subjects participated in one of three arms. Arm (1): DISCO participants with Neuro-
PASC, designated as the DNP group, had a medically documented positive SARS-CoV-2
PCR or antigen test and persistent neurologic symptoms lasting at least 3 months following
acute infection. Arm (2): DISCO participants were age- and sex-matched control subjects
designated nonDNP with undocumented SARS-CoV-2 infection status and without symp-
toms of NP. Arm (3): NP patients who had a medically documented positive SARS-CoV-2
PCR or antigen test and persistent neurologic symptoms lasting at least 3 months follow-
ing acute infection and age- and sex-matched COVID convalescent control participants,
designated the CC group, who had a documented history of SARS-CoV-2 infection but no
reported persistent post-acute symptoms.
Within arms 1 and 2, all 43 participants underwent sleep profiling and completed cog-
nitive and quality-of-life assessments. Eleven of these participants (5 DNP and 6 nonDNP)
were also included in the single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis. Final group sizes and
participant overlap between the DISCO and flow cytometry cohorts are summarized in
Table 1.
The analyses reported here were performed on previously collected data and were not
blinded to participant group assignment.
4.2. Clinical, Cognitive, and Sleep Assessments
Participants completed the objective NIH Toolbox and subjective Patient-Reported
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) questionnaires at or near the time
of blood collection [26–28]. NIH Toolbox domains included processing speed, attention,
executive function, and working memory. PROMIS domain scores were expressed as
standardized T-scores with a population mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10. Lower
PROMIS cognitive-function scores indicated greater perceived cognitive difficulty, whereas
higher fatigue, sleep-disturbance, anxiety, and depression scores indicated greater symp-
tom severity.
Sleep assessments were obtained for all 43 DISCO participants as previously de-
scribed [29]. Briefly, level 2 polysomnography was conducted in a all participants using the
Sleep Profiler system (Advanced Brain Monitoring, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Measurements
included the duration and percentage of rapid eye movement sleep and non-rapid eye
movement sleep stages N1, N2, and N3; sleep latency; wake after sleep onset; sleep effi-
ciency; total and index measures of cortical arousals; pulse rate; electroencephalographic
spectral power, including delta or slow-wave activity; and respiratory events, including
apneas, hypopneas, and oxygen desaturations.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
17 of 23
4.3. Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell and Plasma Isolation
Venous blood samples were collected into sodium heparin tubes. Whole blood was lay-
ered over 15 mL of Histopaque-1077 density-gradient medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA) in 50 mL Leucosep tubes (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) and cen-
trifuged at 1000× g for 18 min at room temperature.
The plasma fraction was collected and stored at −80 ◦C. PBMCs were collected from
the density-gradient interface, washed twice with sterile PBS, and treated with ACK red
blood cell lysis buffer (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Cells were either used
immediately or viably cryopreserved in 10% DMSO in FBS until downstream analysis.
4.4. CD3+ T-Cell Enrichment and Single-Cell RNA Sequencing
Freshly collected PBMCs were counted and subjected to positive selection for CD3-
expressing cells using magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany;
catalog no. 130-050-101). The enriched cell fraction was then prepared for droplet-based
single-cell RNA (scRNA) sequencing using the 10x Genomics platform (Chromium X,
10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA, USA). Libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq X Plus
sequencing system (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).
Although the enrichment procedure targeted CD3+ T cells, a reproducible population
of non-CD3+ cells was retained in the captured cell suspensions. These cells were considered
bystander cells carried through the positive-selection procedure. Non-CD3+ cells were not
analyzed for frequency because the enrichment process precluded interpretation of their
relative abundance, but were retained for transcriptomic analyses when the relevant cell
lineage was represented in all sequenced participants.
Single-cell gene-expression libraries were generated using the 10x Genomics platform.
Base-call files were processed using Cell Ranger version 7.1.0 (10x Genomics, Pleasanton,
CA, USA). Reads were aligned to the human GRCh38 reference genome using GENCODE
release 32/Ensembl release 98 annotations. The resulting gene-by-cell count matrices were
imported into Seurat for quality control and downstream analyses.
4.5. Flow Cytometry
Cryopreserved PBMCs were thawed and counted, and 1 × 106 cells per sample were
stained with MitoSOX Red mitochondrial superoxide indicator (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 37 ◦C according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells
were washed and stained with viability dye (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at room
temperature in the dark. Following an additional wash, cells were stained with surface
antibodies at 4 ◦C. Antibodies used for immunophenotyping are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Antibodies used for flow cytometric immunophenotyping.
Marker
Clone
Fluorophore
CD3
OKT3
PE-Cy7
CD4
SK3
PerCP-Cy5.5
CD8
SK1
APC-Cy7
CD16
3G8
BV786
CD14
M5E2
BV711
CD127
HIL-7R-M21
BV421
CD25
M-A251
FITC
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
18 of 23
Samples were acquired on a BD FACSymphony A1 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA, USA), with 10,000 cellular events collected per sample. Data were analyzed
using FlowJo version 10 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). Staining and analysis were
performed as previously described [30].
4.6. scRNA-Seq Data Processing and Quality Control
scRNA-seq data were analyzed in R version 4.4.1 using RStudio version 2024.12.1
Build 563 (Posit Software, PBC, Boston, MA, USA) on Windows. Single-cell analyses were
performed using Seurat version 5.0.2 and SeuratObject version 5.1.0.
Cell Ranger filtered gene-by-cell count matrices from each participant were imported
using Read10X and converted to individual Seurat objects. During initial object creation,
genes detected in fewer than three cells within an individual participant and cells containing
fewer than 200 detected genes were excluded. Participant-level objects were then merged
into a single dataset.
The percentage of transcripts derived from mitochondrial genes was calculated for
each cell.
Cells were retained for analysis when they contained more than 500 and
fewer than 6000 detected genes and less than 20% mitochondrial transcripts. Follow-
ing quality-control filtering, gene-expression counts were normalized using Seurat’s log-
normalization procedure.
4.7. Cell-Type Annotation and Lineage Selection
Final cell identities were assigned using a label-first strategy because unsupervised
clustering approaches were dominated by interdonor variability and did not reproducibly
resolve shared biologically meaningful populations across participants. Cell-level reference
annotations were generated using SingleR version 2.6.0 with MonacoImmuneData from
celldex version 1.14.0 as the reference dataset. Broad immune cell identities were assigned
using the main Monaco reference labels, and T-cell populations were subsequently anno-
tated using the fine-level reference labels. Reference-based annotations were evaluated
using canonical lineage-marker expression and were manually reviewed and refined when
supported by concordant marker patterns.
The annotated dataset was divided into T-cell and non-CD3+ compartments for down-
stream analysis. For lineage-specific analyses, only populations meeting the prespecified
minimum cell-number requirements in both the DNP and nonDNP groups were retained.
Final annotated objects were saved separately for the two compartments.
4.8. Associations of Monocyte Transcriptional Programs with Sleep and Cognitive Measures
Associations between monocyte gene expression and minimum SpO2 or cognitive
performance were evaluated in the 11 participants included in the scRNA-seq cohort.
Monocytes were identified using the broad SingleR annotation in the Seurat object. For each
participant and gene, mean-positive expression was calculated as the mean normalized
expression among monocytes with expression greater than zero; a value of zero was
assigned when no monocytes from a participant expressed the gene.
For the minimum SpO2 analysis, within each group, participant-level monocyte mean-
positive gene expression was modeled as a function of minimum SpO2 for each gene.
Genes were ranked by the signed t statistic for minimum SpO2 and used for gene set
enrichment analysis.
For the direct cognition analysis, NIH Toolbox processing speed, attention, executive
function, and working memory scores were combined in a repeated-measures analysis.
Associations between participant-level monocyte mean-positive gene expression and NIH
Toolbox scores were calculated separately within each group using linear mixed-effects
models with Toolbox domain as a fixed effect and participant ID as a random intercept.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
19 of 23
For both analyses, genes were ranked by the corresponding within-group association
statistic, and GSEA was performed separately in the DNP and nonDNP groups. The
complete ranked gene universe was tested against the pathway collection contained in
immune_t2g.rds. The complete gene membership for each pathway used in the analysis is
provided in Supplementary Table S2.
4.9. Monocyte Anchor Score
For each of the 13 anchor genes, a z-score was calculated from participant-level mean-
positive expression using the standard formula:
z = x −µ
σ
where x is the subject mean-positive expression value for each respective anchor gene,
µ is the mean expression of that gene across the 11 scRNA-seq participants, and σ is
the corresponding standard deviation. The monocyte anchor score for each subject was
calculated as the average of the 13 anchor-gene z-scores.
4.10. CD3+ T-Cell Subset Differential Expression and Pathway Analyses
CD3+ T cells were analyzed using SingleR fine annotations. For each CD3+ T-cell
subset, raw counts were summed by subject to generate pseudobulk count matrices. Only
subsets represented by at least 50 cells per subject in at least three subjects within each
group were included. Genes with at least 10 counts in at least two subjects were retained.
Pseudobulk counts were converted to log2(counts per million [CPM] + 1), and Pearson
correlations between gene expression and the monocyte anchor z-score were calculated
separately within the DNP and nonDNP groups.
For pathway analysis, genes were ranked by their Pearson correlation coefficient with
the monocyte anchor z-score. GSEA was performed using fgsea version 1.30.0 against the
immune pathway collection contained in immune_t2g.rds. Pathways were evaluated using
the multilevel GSEA algorithm with the lower p value boundary set to zero. Benjamini–
Hochberg-adjusted p values were calculated across all pathways tested within each group
and CD3+ T-cell subset.
4.11. TcR-Stratified Anchor-Ranked Pathway Analysis
TcR clonotype annotations were assigned using paired T-cell receptor beta variable
gene (TRBV) and complementarity-determining region 3 beta (CDR3β) sequences. A
TcR matching key was generated for each cell as TRBV:CDR3β. Cells lacking a valid
matching key were excluded from the TcR analysis. Clonotype specificity annotations were
generated by comparing TRBV and CDR3β sequences with VDJdb (release 30 July 2025;
https://vdjdb.cdr3.net), McPAS-TcR (http://friedmanlab.weizmann.ac.il/McPAS-TCR/,
accessed on 13 August 2026), and ImmuneCODE MIRA (https://clients.adaptivebiotech.
com/pub/covid-2020, accessed on 13 August 2026) entries using exact matches and near
matches with a maximum Hamming or Levenshtein distance of one. Clonotypes were
classified as SARS-CoV-2, autoreactive, both, or other/unknown based on the combined
database annotations.
Clonotypes were considered expanded when the same TRBV:CDR3β combination
was represented by at least two cells within a subject. Cells were evaluated in three analysis
schemes: all cells in the TcR analysis universe; a primary expansion scheme separating
unexpanded and expanded cells; and a detailed specificity scheme separating expanded
other/unknown, expanded SARS-CoV-2, expanded autoreactive, and expanded clonotypes
annotated as both SARS-CoV-2 and autoreactive.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
20 of 23
For each analysis bin, raw counts were summed across cells within each subject to
generate pseudobulk count matrices. Subject-level pseudobulk bins containing at least five
cells were retained, and analyses were performed for group/bin combinations represented
by at least three subjects. Pseudobulk counts were converted to log2(CPM + 1). Within
each analysis bin, Pearson correlations between gene expression and the monocyte anchor
z-score were calculated separately in the DNP and nonDNP groups, and genes were ranked
by the resulting correlation coefficient.
NES and adjusted p values were determined by GSEA using the multilevel fgsea
algorithm for the MITOCARTA_OXPHOS and CUSTOM_CYTOTOX_CORE pathways
contained in immune_t2g.rds. Pathways with adjusted p < 0.05 were considered significant.
4.12. Associations Between Monocyte Mitochondrial Superoxide and Immune Cell Measures
Associations between monocyte mitochondrial superoxide and immune cell pheno-
types were evaluated separately in the CC and NP groups. Monocyte MitoSOX fluorescence
intensity was correlated with the percentages of CD14-positive and CD16-positive cells
within the myeloid compartment and with MitoSOX fluorescence intensity in total CD3+,
CD4+, and CD8+ populations as well as Tregs. Spearman correlation coefficients and corre-
sponding p values were calculated using subjects with complete values for each comparison.
Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied across the tested correlations separately within
each group.
4.13. Statistical Analysis
Statistical tests were selected according to the structure of each analysis. Two-group
flow cytometry comparisons were evaluated by Mann–Whitney U tests and analyses
incorporating group and cell subset factors by two-way ANOVA. Associations between
continuous clinical measures were evaluated using Pearson or Spearman correlations as
specified, and group differences in continuous associations were tested using regression
interaction terms. Repeated NIH Toolbox cognitive domains were analyzed using linear
mixed-effects models with participant as a random intercept. Ranked transcriptomic
associations were evaluated by GSEA with multiple-testing correction as described in the
corresponding analysis sections. Analyses were exploratory, and no a priori sample-size or
power calculation was performed for the hypotheses evaluated in this study.
Outlier sensitivity analyses were performed to assess influential observations. Multi-
variate participant data were evaluated by PCA followed by robust Mahalanobis distance
screening in the principal component space. For scRNA-seq data, participant-level pseu-
dobulk profiles were evaluated together with donor technical quality control metrics of
cell number, pseudobulk library size, median RNA count, median detected features, and
median mitochondrial read percentage. Flow cytometry comparisons, minimum SpO2-to-
processing speed interaction, and monocyte anchor z-scores were additionally assessed by
LOO analysis.
4.14. Software and Code Availability
Software packages and applications used for data processing, statistical analysis,
pathway analysis, and figure generation included GraphPad Prism version 10.4.1, Seurat
version 5.0.2, SeuratObject version 5.1.0, SingleR version 2.6.0, celldex version 1.14.0,
SingleCellExperiment version 1.26.0, clustree version 0.5.1, Harmony version 1.2.3, DESeq2
version 1.44.0, edgeR version 4.2.2, limma version 3.60.6, fgsea version 1.30.0, GSVA version
1.52.3, msigdbr version 25.1.1, org.Hs.eg.db version 3.19.1, Matrix version 1.7.0, dplyr
version 1.1.4, tidyr version 1.3.1, readr version 2.1.5, ggplot2 version 3.5.2, pheatmap version
1.0.13, ComplexHeatmap version 2.20.0, openxlsx version 4.2.8, and vegan version 2.7.1.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
21 of 23
Supplementary Materials:
The following supporting information can be downloaded at:
https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms27167474/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.J.K., B.A.H., A.C.C., K.L.K. and M.R.C.; methodology,
B.A.H., A.C.C., K.L.K. and M.R.C.; software, B.A.H. and A.C.C.; validation, B.A.H. and A.C.C.;
formal analysis, B.A.H. and A.C.C.; investigation, M.L. and J.M.; resources, I.J.K.; data curation,
B.A.H., A.C.C., M.L. and J.M.; writing—original draft preparation, I.J.K., B.A.H. and A.C.C.; writing—
review and editing, I.J.K., B.A.H., A.C.C., M.L., J.M., K.L.K. and M.R.C.; visualization, M.L. and J.M.;
supervision, I.J.K.; project administration, I.J.K.; funding acquisition, I.J.K., K.L.K. and M.R.C. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported in part by National Institutes on Aging 3R01AG059291-04S1 to
K.L.K., M.R.C. and I.J.K.
Institutional Review Board Statement: This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Northwestern University. Participants
in the Northwestern Medicine Neuro-COVID-19 Clinic and the Study of Disparities in Sleep and
Cognition in Older Adults were enrolled under protocol STU00217720, approved on 1 September
2022. Additional participants recruited through the Northwestern Medicine Neuro-COVID-19 Clinic
or from the community were enrolled under protocol STU00212583, approved on 2 June 2020.
Informed Consent Statement: Written informed consent was obtained from all participants involved
in the study.
Data Availability Statement: Raw data supporting the findings of this study are not publicly available
due to participant privacy considerations. Data may be made available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request to qualified researchers.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Al-Aly, Z.; Davis, H.; McCorkell, L.; Soares, L.; Wulf-Hanson, S.; Iwasaki, A.; Topol, E.J. Long COVID science, research and policy.
Nat. Med. 2024, 30, 2148–2164. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Perez Giraldo, G.S.; Ali, S.T.; Kang, A.K.; Patel, T.R.; Budhiraja, S.; Gaelen, J.I.; Lank, G.K.; Clark, J.R.; Mukherjee, S.; Singer, T.;
et al. Neurologic Manifestations of Long COVID Differ Based on Acute COVID-19 Severity. Ann. Neurol. 2023, 94, 146–159.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Choudhury, N.A.; Mukherjee, S.; Singer, T.; Venkatesh, A.; Perez Giraldo, G.S.; Jimenez, M.; Miller, J.; Lopez, M.; Hanson,
B.A.; Bawa, A.P.; et al. Neurologic Manifestations of Long COVID Disproportionately Affect Young and Middle-Age Adults.
Ann. Neurol. 2025, 97, 369–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Rouen, A.; Taieb, J.; Caetano, G.; Pitron, V.; Elbaz, M.; Salmon, D.; Leger, D. Polysomnographic parameters in long-COVID
chronic insomnia patients. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 2023, 25, 43–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Sun, H.; Dang, R.; Haack, M.; Hauser, K.; Scott-Sutherland, J.; Westover, M.B.; Parthasarathy, S.; Redline, S.; Thomas, R.J.;
Mullington, J.M. Facility-measured nocturnal hypoxemia and sleep among adults with long COVID versus age- and sex-matched
healthy adults: A preliminary observational study. Sleep Adv. 2025, 6, zpaf017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Chien, C.; Heine, J.; Khalil, A.; Schlenker, L.; Hartung, T.J.; Boesl, F.; Schwichtenberg, K.; Rust, R.; Bellmann-Strobl, J.; Franke, C.;
et al. Altered brain perfusion and oxygen levels relate to sleepiness and attention in post-COVID syndrome. Ann. Clin. Transl.
Neurol. 2024, 11, 2016–2029. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Codo, A.C.; Davanzo, G.G.; Monteiro, L.B.; de Souza, G.F.; Muraro, S.P.; Virgilio-da-Silva, J.V.; Prodonoff, J.S.; Carregari, V.C.;
Junior, C.A.O.d.B.; Crunfli, F.; et al. Elevated Glucose Levels Favor SARS-CoV-2 Infection and Monocyte Response through a
HIF-1alpha/Glycolysis-Dependent Axis. Cell Metab. 2020, 32, 437–446.e5. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Gibellini, L.; De Biasi, S.; Paolini, A.; Borella, R.; Boraldi, F.; Mattioli, M.; Lo Tartaro, D.; Fidanza, L.; Caro-Maldonado, A.;
Meschiari, M.; et al. Altered bioenergetics and mitochondrial dysfunction of monocytes in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia.
EMBO Mol. Med. 2020, 12, e13001. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Dirajlal-Fargo, S.; Maison, D.P.; Durieux, J.C.; Andrukhiv, A.; Funderburg, N.; Ailstock, K.; Gerschenson, M.; Mccomsey,
G.A. Altered mitochondrial respiration in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Mitochondrion 2024, 75, 101849. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
22 of 23
10.
Macnaughtan, J.; Chau, K.Y.; Brennan, E.; Toffoli, M.; Spinazzola, A.; Hillman, T.; Heightman, M.; Schapira, A.H.V. Mitochondrial
function is impaired in long COVID patients. Ann. Med. 2025, 57, 2528167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Semo, D.; Shomanova, Z.; Sindermann, J.; Mohr, M.; Evers, G.; Motloch, L.J.; Reinecke, H.; Godfrey, R.; Pistulli, R. Persistent
Monocytic Bioenergetic Impairment and Mitochondrial DNA Damage in PASC Patients with Cardiovascular Complications.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025, 26, 4562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Hanson, B.A.; Visvabharathy, L.; Orban, Z.S.; Jimenez, M.; Batra, A.; Liotta, E.M.; DeLisle, R.K.; Klausner, J.D.; Cohen, P.; Padhye,
A.S.; et al. Plasma proteomics show altered inflammatory and mitochondrial proteins in patients with neurologic symptoms of
post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Brain Behav. Immun. 2023, 114, 462–474. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Thompson, E.A.; Cascino, K.; Ordonez, A.A.; Zhou, W.; Vaghasia, A.; Hamacher-Brady, A.; Brady, N.R.; Sun, I.-H.; Wang, R.;
Rosenberg, A.Z.; et al. Metabolic programs define dysfunctional immune responses in severe COVID-19 patients. Cell Rep. 2021,
34, 108863. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Siska, P.J.; Decking, S.M.; Babl, N.; Matos, C.; Bruss, C.; Singer, K.; Klitzke, J.; Schön, M.; Simeth, J.; Köstler, J.; et al. Metabolic
imbalance of T cells in COVID-19 is hallmarked by basigin and mitigated by dexamethasone. J. Clin. Investig. 2021, 131, e148225.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Etter, M.M.; Martins, T.A.; Kulsvehagen, L.; Pössnecker, E.; Duchemin, W.; Hogan, S.; Sanabria-Diaz, G.; Müller, J.; Chiappini, A.;
Rychen, J.; et al. Severe Neuro-COVID is associated with peripheral immune signatures, autoimmunity and neurodegeneration:
A prospective cross-sectional study. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 6777. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Charles, A.L.; Debrut, L.; Oulehri, W.; Vincent, V.; Delagreverie, H.; Asael, P.; Riou, M.; Giannini, M.; Meyer, A.; Geny, B. Impaired
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell (PBMC) Mitochondrial Respiration Is Associated with Mortality and Long COVID Syndrome
Severity in COVID-19 Patients. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025, 26, 10377. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Ravi, S.; Mitchell, T.; Kramer, P.; Chacko, B.; Darley-Usmar, V.M. Mitochondria in monocytes and macrophages-implications for
translational and basic research. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2014, 53, 202–207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Spiteri, A.G.; Wishart, C.L.; Pamphlett, R.; Locatelli, G.; King, N.J.C. Microglia and monocytes in inflammatory CNS disease:
Integrating phenotype and function. Acta Neuropathol. 2022, 143, 179–224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Liu, G.; Antoun, E.; Fries, A.; Yao, X.; Yin, Z.; Dong, D.; Wang, W.; Wing, P.A.C.; Dejnirattisa, W.; Supasa, P.; et al. Long-persisting
SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific CD4+ T cells associated with mild disease and increased cytotoxicity post COVID-19. Nat. Commun.
2025, 16, 8743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Peng, Y.; Felce, S.L.; Dong, D.; Penkava, F.; Mentzer, A.J.; Yao, X.; Liu, G.; Yin, Z.; Chen, J.-L.; Lu, Y.; et al. An immunodominant
NP105–113-B*07:02 cytotoxic T cell response controls viral replication and is associated with less severe COVID-19 disease.
Nat. Immunol. 2022, 23, 50–61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Korobova, Z.R.; Arsentieva, N.A.; Butenko, A.A.; Kudryavtsev, I.V.; Rubinstein, A.A.; Turenko, A.S.; Ostankova, Y.V.; Boeva, E.V.;
Knizhnikova, A.A.; Norka, A.O.; et al. T Cell Dynamics in COVID-19, Long COVID and Successful Recovery. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025,
26, 7258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Yin, K.; Peluso, M.J.; Luo, X.; Thomas, R.; Shin, M.-G.; Neidleman, J.; Andrew, A.; Young, K.C.; Ma, T.; Hoh, R.; et al. Long
COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation and an uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2.
Nat. Immunol. 2024, 25, 218–225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Liu, X.; Zhao, J.; Wang, H.; Wang, W.; Su, X.; Liao, X.; Zhang, S.; Sun, J.; Zhang, Z. Metabolic Defects of Peripheral T Cells in
COVID-19 Patients. J. Immunol. 2021, 206, 2900–2908. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Gagnon, C.; Vincent, T.; Bherer, L.; Gayda, M.; Cloutier, S.O.; Nozza, A.; Guertin, M.-C.; Blaise, P.; Cloutier, I.; Kamada, A.; et al.
Oxygen supplementation and cognitive function in long-COVID. PLoS ONE 2024, 19, e0312735. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Rowntree, L.C.; Audsley, J.; Allen, L.F.; McQuilten, H.A.; Hagen, R.R.; Chaurasia, P.; Petersen, J.; Littler, D.R.; Tan, H.-X.;
Murdiyarso, L.; et al. SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8(+) T cells from people with long COVID establish and maintain effector
phenotype and key TCR signatures over 2 years. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2024, 121, e2411428121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Gershon, R.C.; Cella, D.; Fox, N.A.; Havlik, R.J.; Hendrie, H.C.; Wagster, M.V. Assessment of neurological and behavioural
function: The NIH Toolbox. Lancet Neurol. 2010, 9, 138–139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Weintraub, S.; Dikmen, S.S.; Heaton, R.K.; Tulsky, D.S.; Zelazo, P.D.; Bauer, P.J.; Carlozzi, N.E.; Slotkin, J.; Blitz, D.; Wallner-Allen,
K.; et al. Cognition assessment using the NIH Toolbox. Neurology 2013, 80, S54–S64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Lai, J.S.; Cella, D.; Choi, S.; Junghaenel, D.U.; Christodoulou, C.; Gershon, R.; Stone, A. How item banks and their application can
influence measurement practice in rehabilitation medicine: A PROMIS fatigue item bank example. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2011,
92, S20–S27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 7474
23 of 23
29.
Maas, M.B.; Reid, K.J.; Jimenez, M.; Lopez, M.; Miller, J.; Carnethon, M.R.; Zee, P.C.; Knutson, K.L.; Koralnik, I.J. Multidimensional
Characterization of Long COVID Fatigue. Behav. Sleep Med. 2025, 23, 675–684. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Cogswell, A.C.; Maski, K.; Scammell, T.E.; Tucker, D.; Orban, Z.S.; Koralnik, I.J. Children with Narcolepsy type 1 have increased
T-cell responses to orexins. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 2019, 6, 2566–2572. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27167474
