Academic Editor: Elisa Oltra
Received: 22 June 2026
Revised: 20 July 2026
Accepted: 20 July 2026
Published: 22 July 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Review
Low-Dose Ionizing Radiation and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): A Review of Recent
Evidence and Future Research Directions Toward the Elucidation
of a Metabolic, Immunologic, and Signaling Cascade
Andrej Rusin 1, Alan Cocchetto 2 and Carmel Mothersill 3,*
1
Department of Integrated Biomedical Engineering and Health Sciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada; rusina@mcmaster.ca
2
National CFIDS Foundation Inc., Hull, MA 02045, USA; acocchetto@gmail.com
3
Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada
*
Correspondence: mothers@mcmaster.ca
Abstract
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is an idiopathic, multisys-
tem disorder marked by debilitating fatigue, post-exertional malaise, cognitive dysfunction
and neuroinflammation. Its etiology remains unclear, yet emerging evidence implicates a
complex interplay between immune dysregulation, metabolic impairment, mitochondrial
bioenergetics, and environmental stressors such as viral infection or low-dose ionizing
radiation (LDIR). To develop treatments for ME/CFS, it is essential to identify suitable
targets for therapy. In this narrative review, we discuss recent findings on the overlap
of ME/CFS with LDIR effects and examine potential mechanistic links that may arise
from LDIR-induced bystander effects (RIBEs). We highlight potential candidate biomark-
ers that bridge these domains: mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction, altered ornithine
transport via SLC25A15 (ORNT1), possible roles of CD38 in the context of immunity and
NAD+ depletion, cyclin D1–dependent metabolic reprogramming and modulation of gene
expression, and α-synuclein as a potential neuroinflammatory damage-associated molec-
ular pattern (DAMP). While the involvement of these biomarkers in ME/CFS is yet to
be confirmed experimentally, evidence from in vitro studies of irradiated cells, exosome
profiling, and patient samples suggests that RIBEs can, in theory, produce prominent cel-
lular ME/CFS phenotypes through associated mechanisms, including those exhibiting
oxidative stress, impaired ATP production, and immune modulation. We propose a hy-
pothetical, exploratory model wherein LDIR initiates or contributes to adaptive metabolic
shifts (including CD38 upregulation and cyclin D1 stabilization) that, coupled with persis-
tent bystander signaling, could potentially culminate in chronic fatigue and neurocognitive
symptoms in some reported ME/CFS cases. Finally, we outline a research agenda en-
compassing the establishment of standardized diagnostic criteria, multi-omics profiling
of patient cohorts, exosome analysis, functional mitochondrial assays, and targeted thera-
peutic trials focusing on possible anti-CD38 antibodies and NAD+ precursor therapy. By
integrating recent findings in low-dose radiation biology with ME/CFS pathophysiology,
this review aims to promote interdisciplinary investigations that may uncover mechanistic
insights and novel biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment of ME/CFS. We further review
steps in a proposed model taking us from low-dose radiation exposure to a number of
possible targets.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
2 of 45
Keywords:
radiation-induced bystander effect (RIBE); low-dose ionizing radiation;
mitochondria
1. Introduction to Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, also known as Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/CFS (ME/CFS)
and Chronic Fatigue and Immune Dysfunction Syndrome (CFIDS), is a debilitating condi-
tion that severely impairs the ability of patients to go about their daily lives [1–3]. Patients
are typically unable to engage in activities that were tolerated previously due to persis-
tent fatigue and associated symptoms that cannot be ameliorated through rest [4]. Other
common symptoms of ME/CFS include persistent cognitive difficulties, post-exertional
malaise, vertigo, muscle pain, tender lymph nodes, and unrestful sleep [5]. A diagnosis of
ME/CFS is usually made following exclusion of other diseases, and the diagnosis utilizes
one of several sets of criteria [6]. In the United States, the Fukuda Criteria for ME/CFS
diagnosis were applied historically following a differential diagnosis, which emphasized
clinically evaluated yet unexplained, persistent, and relapsing fatigue that could not be
alleviated through rest, along with several secondary symptomatic criteria [1]. Several
other proposed diagnostic criteria are employed in clinical practice today with more ex-
clusionary definitions, including the Canadian Consensus Criteria (CCC) and the (US)
Institute of Medicine Criteria (IOM), which identify post-exertional malaise (PEM) as a
cardinal symptom [7,8]. Though the revised CCC may enhance specificity and afford more
homogeneity among patient groups in studies investigating ME/CFS etiology, the CCC
excludes patients who do not meet its strict criteria and, therefore, may not capture a full
“spectrum” of ME/CFS cases; this may unintentionally prevent some patients suffering
from debilitating fatigue from being thoroughly evaluated and treated [8,9]. The diversity
of diagnostic criteria and lack of a universally accepted set of criteria make it difficult to
compare and glean new information from different studies on ME/CFS; since different
studies oftentimes utilize different diagnostic criteria and definitions, patient and control
groups may vary considerably between publications [3]. For example, many researchers
and patients contend that PEM is a hallmark symptom of ME/CFS, which often distin-
guishes the disease from possibly related syndromes like Idiopathic Chronic Fatigue (ICF)
and Post-Acute Infection Syndrome (PAIS) [10,11].
Though the disease affects millions globally, and many groups have investigated
its progression and etiology, the underlying cause or causes remain elusive [12]. Several
authors have proposed that ME/CFS may even be a variety of related conditions that
can be categorized into subgroups, with post-exertional malaise being a ubiquitous symp-
tom [13–19]. Presently, the literature is still contentious but establishes a strong case across
research groups that ME/CFS is a physiological condition and likely involves a complex
interplay of metabolism, immunity, and neuropathy in the emergence and progression of
the disease [20–25].
Many ME/CFS cases begin after acute infection or after exposure to a stressor; the
observed preceding infections in ME/CFS are typically viral [26,27]. In fact, many of the
symptoms which constitute some of the commonly accepted diagnostic criteria overlap
considerably with PAIS [10,11]. There has been considerable research into whether infection
by a specific virus directly causes ME/CFS; however, clear etiological connections between
any infection and ME/CFS manifestation have not been definitively established [11,26,27].
For example, a significant percentage of individuals suffering from Long COVID, a pro-
tracted type of PAIS that occurs in some following recovery from acute COVID-19, exhibit
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
3 of 45
symptoms that overlap with ME/CFS, depending on the diagnostic criteria being ap-
plied [22,28,29]. Further, a significant percentage of patients with infectious mononucleosis,
a disease primarily caused by the Epstein–Barr virus, develop symptoms that meet the
diagnostic criteria of both PAIS and ME/CFS [26,30–36]. Other known viruses that may
contribute to the development of ME/CFS in some cases include SARS-CoV-1 [5,37], vari-
cella zoster virus [38], and influenza virus A subtype H1N1 [39,40]. It is important to
note that other stressors have been identified as potentially causative in other ME/CFS
cases, including bacterial infections and disrupted gut microbiota [41–43], psychological
stress [44–46], traumatic injury [47,48], pregnancy [49], and exposure to mold [50–52].
Beyond infection, autoimmune models propose that infectious or other environmen-
tal stressors may promote sustained immune dysregulation in ME/CFS, leading to the
production of autoantibodies against adrenergic or muscarinic receptors, which could
possibly contribute to observed symptoms such as orthostatic intolerance, fatigue, and
cognitive impairment [53–55]. Additional findings in this area, including altered B-cell
function, T-cell abnormalities, and associations with specific human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) alleles in some cohorts, further support the possibility of autoimmune involvement
in ME/CFS [55–58]. These findings have not been consistently replicated across all pa-
tient populations, indicating that autoimmunity may likely be relevant only in a subset of
individuals with ME/CFS.
Additionally, neuroinflammatory models propose that persistent activation of mi-
croglia and astrocytes within the central nervous system leads to chronic production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and other inflammatory mediators in ME/CFS [59–61]. This
sustained neuroimmune activation may disrupt neuronal signaling, alter neurotransmitter
homeostasis, and impair autonomic regulation. This has been proposed to result in fatigue,
cognitive dysfunction (or “brain fog”), sleep disturbances, and post-exertional malaise. Pe-
ripheral immune activation, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and blood–brain
barrier alterations may further amplify these neuroinflammatory processes. Although
direct evidence of neuroinflammation in ME/CFS remains mixed due to methodological
differences in studies and disease heterogeneity, accumulating neuroimaging, cerebrospinal
fluid, and immunological studies support the hypothesis that neuroimmune dysfunction is
an important component of disease pathogenesis.
In this report, we describe how low-dose ionizing radiation (LDIR) exposure could
potentially be linked to ME/CFS. We propose that our hypothetical LDIR model should
be considered complementary to, rather than competitive with, existing hypotheses of
ME/CFS pathogenesis. Rather than replacing infectious, autoimmune, or neuroinflamma-
tory models, LDIR exposure may represent an upstream environmental trigger capable of
initiating or amplifying the biological processes implicated in these established mechanisms.
Radiation-induced oxidative stress, persistent immune activation, mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion, and neuroinflammation, as described in this review, could potentially contribute to
the development of persistent immune dysregulation, microglial activation, and autonomic
dysfunction that characterize ME/CFS. Within this framework, we propose that LDIR is
not a universal cause of the disease but rather one of several potential initiating factors
that may contribute to disease onset in susceptible individuals, ultimately converging on
shared downstream pathways responsible for the clinical manifestations of ME/CFS.
Atomic Veterans and Connections to Low-Dose Ionizing Radiation Exposure
Many individuals exposed to ionizing radiation, following nuclear catastrophes (e.g.,
Chernobyl, Fukushima), the deliberate use of nuclear weapons in war (e.g., Hiroshima,
Nagasaki), and inadvertent exposure following nuclear weapons tests (e.g., Marshall Is-
lands, other Cold War tests), have experienced diverse and long-lasting health effects that
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
4 of 45
overlap with the symptomatology of ME/CFS [62–74]. While the primary focus of radiation
protection efforts and studies has been, for decades, to mitigate the emergence of excess
cancers due to high-dose exposures, much less focus has been afforded to the other effects
of Post-Radiation Syndrome (PRS) that may occur even at low doses [75,76]. Many of those
directly affected by these radiation events assert that their symptoms could be the result
of ionizing radiation exposure even at lower doses; however, much of the time, they are
met with the obstinate incredulity of clinicians and officials who do not believe that their
symptoms can be causally linked to radiation exposure. The basis of this belief relies on
two ideas: that low doses cannot produce such health effects, especially many years after
the initial exposure, and that there are insufficient data to conduct epidemiological analyses
to form a causal link between exposure and disease [75]. Based on decades of research into
low doses and the non-targeted effects of ionizing radiation, both premises can no longer
be justified by evidence [77–83]. In brief, the commonly applied linear no-threshold model
(LNT), which is often used inappropriately to exclude the involvement of low doses in the
etiology of disease beyond stochastic cancer risk, is no longer sufficient in modeling the
effects of radiation exposure in the realm of low-dose (<100 mSv) effects. The effects of
low doses of radiation on organisms are highly context-dependent (i.e., radiosensitivity of
the organism, type of radiation used, tissue(s) exposed, radiation energy, fractionation, et
cetera) and can involve persistent transgenerational effects [84,85], DNA damage [86–88],
complex bystander signaling cascades [89–92], altered metabolism [93–95], inflamma-
tory/immune responses [91,96], oxidative and nitrosative stress [86,87,93–95,97–99], and
other effects that cannot reliably be predicted by standard models of stochastic risk which
rely on historical data from high-dose exposures and records of excess cancers [75]. The
merits and drawbacks of LNT will not be extensively discussed in this review, but we
have extensively covered the subject in previous reviews. For further reading on LNT,
please see [78,82,83,100–102].
The primary interest in ME/CFS and how it may be connected to radiation exposure
began following publication of reports in the late 1990s and early aughts that concerned
clinical assessments of cohorts of Chernobyl liquidation workers. These reports found
symptoms consistent with ME/CFS, including persistent fatigue, cognitive issues, sleep
disturbances, and mood changes even years following exposure [62,63,103–106]. Important
to note are several limiting aspects of these studies in order to provide some context to
these findings. While the studies did report significant symptoms in a large proportion
of the liquidators, even at doses below 300 mSv, it is fair to argue that the small sample
size of approximately 100 liquidators used in the initial study should be broadened to
strengthen its conclusions. Additional research is certainly required in this area, and we
advocate for large-scale, well-controlled epidemiological studies to test these conclusions.
However, it is interesting to note these effects even considering small sample sizes because
there does not currently exist a databank of biological samples representative of these
liquidators or any other patients afflicted with ME/CFS that can be further scrutinized. We
outline several potential avenues of research within this narrative review that could assist
in determining what potential biomarkers could be used to identify LDIR exposure and
what possible related mechanisms could be relevant to ME/CFS pathogenesis. A second
potential issue with these studies is that the liquidators faced not only radiation exposure
but also additional stressors, such as significant psychological trauma, social disruption,
socioeconomic distress, exposure to heavy metals, and extreme working conditions, which
could have contributed to ME/CFS symptoms. We conversely believe this further implies
that ME/CFS pathogenesis is likely related to exposure to a combination of stressors
that promote the manifestation and maintenance of ME/CFS symptoms and that any
new research endeavoring to help elucidate the mechanisms by which this occurs would
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
5 of 45
be optimal to pursue. Additionally, another ostensible problem with these studies is
the lack of a clear dose-dependent relationship between radiation dose and symptoms.
However, we contend that this could be further evidence that low-dose effects are not
clearly dose-dependent in all circumstances, especially given the presence of additional
stressors that could modulate any biologically adaptive or maladaptive responses to the
radiation. Collaborative research within our group has found that radiation-induced
bystander effects (RIBEs) can be induced in immortalized keratinocyte reporters by sera
from survivors of the Chernobyl Disaster, including liquidator cohorts, some twenty years
following the accident [107]; further investigation is required to elucidate these effects
further and probe for relevance in the context of diseases such as ME/CFS. Figure 1 shows
some of the observed effects and similarities between ME/CFS and RIBE.
Figure 1. A diagram illustrating the overlap in observed effects between ME/CFS and RIBEs that are
discussed in this review.
There is considerable overlap with the symptoms of PRS at first glance. In high-dose
exposures, early symptoms include headache, dizziness, weakness, fatigue, anorexia, and
nausea and vomiting [108]. In lower- or targeted-dose exposures, which are more pertinent
to radiotherapy, extreme fatigue is a common symptom. In fact, delayed fatigue in those
undergoing external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is both a common and extensively
researched symptom in the context of cancer therapy [109–112]. Somnolescence Syndrome
occurs in some as a delayed response to radiation treatment, most commonly in the
treatment of brain tumors [113,114]. This syndrome is characterized by extreme fatigue,
malaise, loss of appetite, and vertigo.
Again, it is important to recognize that many diseases cause fatigue and associated
symptoms. We suggest that a broad examination of potential factors that cause these
symptoms may result in a more robust understanding of the underlying pathophysiology
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
6 of 45
in ME/CFS and syndromes associated with low-dose radiation exposure. There are some
very interesting potential links between ME/CFS and LDIR exposure that will be discussed
in this review. However, these putative connections and mechanistic links still require
extensive in vitro and clinical investigation to validate before firm conclusions can be made.
2. Metabolism and Signaling in ME/CFS
2.1. Hypometabolism and Current Research Limitations
There has been extensive research into reliable biomarkers for ME/CFS, with limited
success at achieving consensus on standard biochemical testing and diagnosis [115,116].
As discussed previously, major problems exist in contemporary research due to small
sample sizes, varied endpoints, disparate samples from different tissues, and inconsistent
diagnostic criteria. A recent systematic review [117] covered studies on a range of potential
biomarkers in several broad categories, including genetic, metabolic, circulatory, neuro-
logical, ion channel, and “physical dysfunction”. While it was found that several studies
validated the use of lymphocytes as a model to investigate etiology and validated evidence
of immune dysfunction, the overall reproducibility of these studies was limited. The au-
thors suggested the establishment of uniform protocols and the need for multidisciplinary
research to address the heterogeneity of findings in future research.
There is considerable evidence that hypometabolism or otherwise disrupted metabolism
in various tissues plays a major role in ME/CFS, and that this dysfunction likely repre-
sents a complex interplay between immunity, metabolism, neuropathology, and inflam-
mation [117–123]. We will examine a few cellular processes and metabolic pathways that
have been investigated in ME/CFS literature and several with suspected yet currently
unconfirmed involvement. A recurring theme in this research is the close examination of
mitochondria due to their close involvement in many different metabolic pathways and
cellular processes [124,125]. We believe that these mechanisms may potentially link specific
ME/CFS cases to LDIR exposure, but further research must be conducted before any firm
conclusions can be drawn.
2.2. The Role of Mitochondria in ME/CFS
Mitochondria are well known as the primary sites of cellular energy production, gen-
erating adenosine triphosphate (ATP) through the mitochondrial respiratory chain and
specifically through oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) [126]. Mitochondria are also es-
sential in many metabolic processes including pyruvate oxidation, pyruvate carboxylation,
the citric acid cycle, and fatty acid synthesis [126]. Further, mitochondria are crucial in sig-
nal transduction in the cell, facilitating or participating in calcium signaling, programmed
cell death, cellular proliferation, innate immunity, and hormonal signaling [127]. As a nexus
of cellular metabolism and energy production, many researchers have long hypothesized
that perturbations of mitochondrial bioenergetics may contribute to the emergence and
severity of symptoms in ME/CFS [124,125]. It appears likely based on current literature
that mitochondrial function is implicated in ME/CFS etiology either as a secondary result
of disease progression or as an underlying cause of the diseased state.
Many studies in the past have reported defects in mitochondria from ME/CFS pa-
tients [124,128–132]. These have suggested that overall mitochondrial function is poten-
tially compromised in ME/CFS patients compared to healthy controls. A common, simple
biomarker used to assess mitochondrial function is overall production of ATP through
Complex V. Previous research has shown defects in OXPHOS pathways and reduced
ATP production in ME/CFS patients, and that this reduction can correlate with clinical
fatigue symptoms [129]. In a meta-analysis of data collected from work on the peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)—which encompasses T cells, B cells, NK cells, and
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
7 of 45
monocytes—from ME/CFS patients, researchers reported significantly lower basal respira-
tion, maximal respiration, ATP production, proton leakage, and reserve respiratory capacity
compared to healthy controls [130]. Further research has examined elevated lactate coinci-
dent with inadequate ATP production in blood cells from ME/CFS patients [130,133] and
hypothesized that the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex may be impaired
in some ME/CFS patients. Studies on PBMCs from ME/CFS patients [20,120,133–135]
indeed demonstrated an impairment of the TCA cycle and protein catabolism, suggesting
possible functional impairment of pyruvate dehydrogenase. Interestingly, one study found
that myoblasts grown in the presence of serum from ME/CFS patients showed increased
mitochondrial respiration and secretion of lactate [133], possibly indicating the presence
of circulating signaling factors. However, these findings are yet to be replicated in larger-
scale studies.
Recent studies of mitochondrial function in the skeletal muscle of ME/CFS patients
continue to provide evidence of abnormalities compared to healthy controls. A study by
Bizjak et al. [136] found evidence of impaired mitochondrial function in the muscle fibers
from patients suffering from ME/CFS and post-COVID Syndrome (PCS), respectively, com-
pared to healthy controls. Further, the same study found differences in distribution of the
OXPHOS capacity of ME/CFS patients compared to healthy controls; however, the mean
difference between the three groups was not statistically significant. A significant difference
between the PCS and ME/CFS groups was revealed in electron micrographs evidencing
“progressed pathological morphological changes in [ME/CFS mitochondria]”. The authors
surmise that these structural changes to mitochondria may indicate “prolonged inactivity
or unknown molecular causes” but strongly encouraged further investigation. Other stud-
ies [28,137] have proposed that mitochondrial calcium signaling may be connected to these
changes, though further research must be done to find a conclusive link.
Another study on lymphoblast cell lines established from ME/CFS patients found
significant reductions in ATP-synthase (Complex V) activity [138]. While compensatory
glycolysis and mitochondrial mass remained the same under conditions of stress, signifi-
cant upregulation of Complex I oxygen consumption, expression of respiratory enzymes,
expression of fatty acid transporters, and TCA cycle enzymes was observed. The au-
thors concluded that while enzymatic activity, expression, and ATP synthesis can return
to steady state in a state of rest, the same cells may not be able to “adequately respond
to acute increases in energy demand as the relevant homeostatic pathways are already
activated” [138]. The same group expanded their findings in a later transcriptomic and
proteomic study [139] on lymphoblast cell lines from ME/CFS patients and healthy con-
trols by examining the pathways suspected to be dysregulated in ME/CFS. The authors
reported similar regulation of glycolysis between the two groups but noted significant
elevation in the enzymes involved in the TCA cycle, pentose phosphate pathway, mito-
chondrial fatty acid oxidation, glutamine/glutamate catabolism, branched chain amino
acid catabolism, and the catabolism of essential fatty acids. The authors concluded that the
compensatory metabolic activity in ME/CFS may involve processes that provide oxidizable
substrates to mitochondria over glycolysis. Further, there is evidence to suggest both mor-
phological and metabolic abnormalities in the mitochondria of other leukocytes, such as
NK-leukocytes [131]. However, further research must be done to establish the involvement
of these potential biomarkers in ME/CFS pathogenesis.
A very interesting clinical study examining the role of mitochondrial signaling and im-
munity in the context of ME/CFS [140] found that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) associated
with serum exosomes is elevated in ME/CFS patients following exercise. Further, these
isolated exosomes were found to promote significant release of IL-1β, a pro-inflammatory
cytokine and mediator of inflammatory responses, from cultured human microglia in vitro.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
8 of 45
These findings suggest that the pathogenesis of ME/CFS likely involves a dynamic in-
terplay of mitochondrial involvement, broader bioenergetics, immunity, and the central
nervous system, and may even implicate mitochondria as direct effectors of extracellu-
lar signaling in ME/CFS pathophysiology. Exosomal signaling must first be justified by
additional clinical studies before this conclusion is accepted.
Many groups have attempted to integrate these findings into a model for mitochondrial
dysfunction in ME/CFS etiology. A common theme is excess oxidative stress [28,129],
which has long been suspected to disrupt membrane potential and ATP synthesis in the
mitochondria of patients. Further, it appears that there is now overwhelming evidence that
metabolic dysfunction is present in the majority of ME/CFS cases [20,129,133,141–143], and
that aberrant oxidative metabolism may precipitate compensatory shifts in mitochondrial
metabolism to establish homeostasis, as hypothesized in previous studies. There appears
to be considerable variance in data from ME/CFS patients compared to healthy controls
across different studies, which may indicate that ME/CFS is a heterogeneous disease
that could involve a myriad of elements and causes between different patients. More
research is required to determine whether these phenomena can be possibly used to
differentiate putative subtypes and/or severities of ME/CFS and if such alterations may
cause progression of the disease or result due to the progression of the disease. If the
latter is the case, it may possibly point towards mitochondrial dysfunction in ME/CFS
being a consequence of systemic immune and inflammatory dysregulation, but these
mechanisms are under active investigation. The findings in the current literature, though
compelling, should be confirmed by studies using larger sample sizes to further elucidate
common trends. It is apparent that limitations may also be addressed by promoting a set of
common diagnostic criteria for ME/CFS and standardizing the replication of key results
representative of mitochondrial dysfunction in relevant samples [133], such as assay of ATP-
synthase activity. Additionally, many recent studies have incorporated testing ME/CFS
patients during post-exertional recovery [23,144] and comparing these findings to healthy
controls. This is a good direction for future research because metabolic abnormalities
related to mitochondrial function are likely to manifest following a period of exertion and
during recovery and during a period of time when ME/CFS symptoms are most likely to
be experienced by patients [24,129,144,145].
2.3. Mitochondria in Low-Dose Radiation Research and RIBE
As previously discussed, mitochondria may provide a tentative link to low-dose ra-
diation exposure in some patients with ME/CFS and similar fatigue syndromes. There is
considerable evidence that RIBEs involve the release of exosomes from cells either exposed
to ionizing radiation directly or having received bystander signals [146–150]. Previous
studies have found that non-coding RNAs, including some miRNA and lncRNAs, may
be involved in the transmission of the bystander signal to neighboring cells through ex-
osomes in irradiated cell-conditioned medium (ICCM) [146,151]. These ICCM exosomes
have also been found to contain mtDNA [147], which may be similar to the potential
“pro-neuroinflammatory exosomes” harboring mtDNA in the sera of some ME/CFS pa-
tients [140]. However, further research is necessary to confirm these findings in a broader
selection of patients and identify whether additional factors, such as ncRNAs, may also be
implicated in ME/CFS signaling.
Mitochondria are central to both cellular metabolism and signaling, and their role
in mediating RIBEs and likely ME/CFS is evident in the literature. Mitochondria and
their associated metabolic pathways are incredibly complex and require the coordination
of hundreds of different proteins and other biomolecules to function properly [126,127].
Obvious targets of future proteomic/transcriptomic/kinetics research endeavoring to
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
9 of 45
link LDIR exposure and ME/CFS would be major enzymes and enzymatic complexes
already known in ME/CFS and low-dose effects, such as the mitochondrial respiratory
complexes, pyruvate dehydrogenase, TCA cycle enzymes, inner- and outer-membrane
translocases, and others [23,92,124,125,128,132,136,138,147,152–154]. It is also probable,
based on previously reviewed research on mitochondrial aberrations in ME/CFS and
because these pathways are connected to larger metabolic and signaling networks, that
mitochondria must be involved in the etiology of ME/CFS in some capacity.
2.4. Putative Biomarkers of Interest in ME/CFS and RIBE Research
The involvement of some mitochondrial proteins has already been clinically demon-
strated in ME/CFS, as reviewed in previous sections. Additional metabolomic and pro-
teomic research is required to establish standard testing practices and diagnostic criteria
to then be investigated in the context of LDIR exposure as well. Such research could
identify potential players affected by indirect radiation effects that could potentially be
linked to ME/CFS in specific patients if common trends in metabolic impairment can
be deduced. If specific proteins are identified as significantly different among patients
and between studies utilizing the same methodology, we suspect that commonly affected
enzymes in ME/CFS will be additionally involved in multiple cellular processes that over-
lap multiple metabolic pathways and may further be implicated in cell-to-cell signaling,
immunity, and inflammation, as described in other, related models. A “holistic” model of
these systems, one that incorporates features and key players identified in the ME/CFS
literature, is almost certainly required to appreciate multiple ostensibly disparate biological
processes that coordinate to manifest a diseased state. Furthermore, even if such a model
provides a yet-incomplete understanding of the pathogenesis or maintenance of ME/CFS,
such a model can nevertheless potentially inform future research endeavoring to elucidate
these mechanisms further to a point where ME/CFS can be effectively prevented or even
treated. Mitochondria, as previously described, are likely to be involved either directly or
indirectly in the manifestation of ME/CFS, owing to their crucial roles in cell signaling
and energy metabolism as well as existing clinical research. Further, a good place to start
looking for potential biomarkers that could link LDIR exposures and ME/CFS is the mito-
chondrion, especially when considering the demonstrable involvement of mitochondrial
enzymes in RIBEs [92,147,153–156]. An example of a mitochondrial protein that may fit this
characterization of multifariousness is ORNT1, which is encoded by the gene SLC25A15
and is involved in numerous cellular processes known to be implicated in both ME/CFS
and RIBEs.
2.5. SLC25A15 Overview and Role in Cellular Metabolism
Mitochondrial ornithine transporter 1 (ORNT1) is a protein that is essential for the
urea cycle [157]. The urea cycle is a primary liver metabolic pathway that converts am-
monia, which is produced during protein metabolism, into urea destined for excretion.
The mitochondrial catabolism of glutamine follows this pathway and produces ammonia
and α-ketoglutarate, which is shunted to the TCA cycle [158]. Ammonia is converted to
carbamoyl phosphate in mitochondria and then is used with ornithine to produce citrulline,
which is then transported outside mitochondria for further processing in the cytosolic
branch of the urea cycle. Ornithine is transported into the mitochondrial matrix via ORNT1
and is utilized in both arginine biosynthesis and the detoxification of ammonia [157,159].
In the context of disease, hyperammonemia can cause lethargy, difficulty concentrating,
confusion, neurotrauma and even death in severe cases [158]. The broad symptomatol-
ogy of urea-cycle disorders has some overlap with ME/CFS, including lethargy, malaise,
nausea, and cognitive issues; however, these symptoms do not typically emerge dur-
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
10 of 45
ing a period of recovery following physical exertion and are primarily linked to protein
intake. There is research that suggests that the urea cycle may be implicated in some
ME/CFS cases [23,24,123,160].
It is currently unknown whether ORNT1 plays a direct role in the pathogenesis
of ME/CFS, and there is a dearth of research on the subject. One large-scale study of
ME/CFS patients identified that SLC25A15 sequence variants may play a role in the
disease [161,162], although further research is required to confirm this finding. While
SLC25A15 has otherwise not been directly investigated within ME/CFS etiology, mutations
in SLC25A15 have been identified in ornithine translocase deficiency or hyperornithinemia-
hyperammonemia–homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome, and there is comparatively con-
siderable research on the etiology of this disease and the involvement of ORNT1 [163].
HHH is a rare autosomal recessive condition that is effectively an inborn error of the
urea cycle; because specific mutations can cause instability and malformation of ORNT1,
mitochondria in liver cells cannot effectively uptake ornithine for participation in the
mitochondrial branch of the urea cycle, which causes buildup of ammonia from protein
metabolism [164]. Treatment of the disorder is largely based on management of symp-
toms and may require the administration of drugs that sequester ammonia and nutritional
supplements that provide arginine [165]. The primary symptoms of the disease include
extreme tiredness in infants and episodic symptoms in adults, which are likely mediated
by ammonia accumulation in the blood and consequent neurotoxicity [166].
The role of SLC25A15 in HHH may serve as a potential case study for how aber-
rant mitochondrial function and cascading biological effects can contribute to disease. It
has been suggested that secondary mitochondrial dysfunction may develop over time in
HHH [167,168]. This concept coincides with clinical findings showing “large and bizarre
mitochondria in liver, muscle, leukocytes and fibroblasts of some HHH patients” [168].
The same study showed that HHH patients had elevated liver enzymes, lactic acidemia,
increased urinary excretion of lactate, and a low pyruvate relative to lactic acid. These
findings are consistent with broader mitochondrial dysfunction in HHH [169,170], which
may be the result of aberrant mitochondrial metabolism compensating for reduced cellular
energy production; because impaired transport of ornithine for use in the mitochondrion oc-
curs, this deficiency could disrupt related pathways which are reliant on a normal metabolic
flux to function properly [166,171]. Specific pathways that are immediately affected involve
amino acid metabolism and nitrogen balance; however, over time this could potentially
lead to aberrant metabolism in related pathways to compensate for reduced substrate and
energy availability. The urea cycle is linked to the metabolism of alanine and aspartate as
well through the activity of arginosuccinate synthetase (ASS) [172,173]. ASS facilitates the
synthesis of arginosuccinate from citrulline and aspartate [172]. A downstream enzyme in
the urea cycle, arginosuccinate lysase (ASL), catalyzes the breakdown of arginosuccinate
to fumarate and L-arginine [174,175]. Fumarate participates in the TCA cycle and is also
produced by the dehydrogenation of succinate by mitochondrial respiratory Complex
II [176,177]. These connections are metabolic clues that may point towards fatigue symp-
toms in HHH being linked to aberrant energy metabolism and reduced cellular energy
efficiency, provided that further research is conducted in this area to confirm these clinical
findings. Both ASS and ASL functional mutations are also included under urea cycle
disorders and share aspects of symptoms with HHH [170,174].
A combination of factors is likely to cause fatigue symptoms in the context of HHH. A
dysfunctional urea cycle most immediately causes accumulation of ammonia, neurotox-
icity, and lethargy symptoms [23,178,179]. Secondary mitochondrial dysfunction due to
compensatory shifts in metabolism to maintain energy and metabolic homeostasis may
result in lower ATP production, potentially causing reduced energy availability. Finally,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
11 of 45
this metabolic imbalance may cause problems in linked metabolic pathways, such as the
TCA cycle [24,125], pyruvate metabolism [131], amino acid synthesis [180], and oxidative
phosphorylation [138,139], which may in turn result in energy insufficiency. In terms of
neurological effects, a combination of these factors could account for cognitive difficulties,
malaise, and fatigue symptoms.
In contrast to the extensive evidence in the HHH literature, there is some research
that indicates that ME/CFS patients may have abnormal levels of ammonia in their blood
post-exertion [21]; however, the research is relatively sparse. As was previously covered,
hyperammonemia has been linked to fatigue symptoms [181]. Moreover, other groups
have noted deficiencies in urea cycle metabolism in some ME/CFS patients [182], although
further research is required to confirm any candidate biomarkers.
A few older clinical studies found decreases in glutamine and ornithine concentrations
in the blood plasma of ME/CFS patients [183,184]. These studies further suggested that
altered energy metabolism may be present in some ME/CFS patients, specifically in the
TCA cycle and function of pyruvate dehydrogenase [143]. As previously outlined [4],
impaired metabolism was reported and is suspected to cause compensatory upregulation
of mitochondrial Complexes I and V, enzymes in upstream pathways (e.g., TCA cycle),
amino acid catabolism, and fatty acid catabolism in the mononuclear cells of ME/CFS
patients. In cerebrospinal fluid, one recent clinical study [180] found elevation of trans-
aconitate, which is involved in the TCA cycle. The same study found elevation of serine
and changes in lipid metabolism compared to healthy controls. Other clinical studies
have found increased lactate in the ventricles of ME/CFS patients [185–188], possibly
indicating dysfunction of normal oxidative phosphorylation in these tissues, pending
additional experimental confirmation. It would be very interesting to further explore these
aspects of altered metabolism in ME/CFS patients in a clinical context and investigate
how such alterations may contribute to disease emergence and severity. Again, there
seems to be considerable evidence that links mitochondrial involvement in ME/CFS in
one form or another [125]. Characterizing the function of ORNT1, ASS, ASL, and other
associated proteins in ME/CFS patient samples from various tissues (e.g., cerebral–spinal
fluid, SMBCs, skeletal muscle, etc.) could shed further light on the etiology of the disease
or even indirectly elucidate dysfunction in different nodes of the metabolic network within
the context of ME/CFS. Furthermore, investigating these enzymes in patient samples
could be used to further metabolically profile ME/CFS patients, eventually leading to the
possible segregation of ME/CFS patient groups into distinct disease subtypes that can be
understood effectively on a mechanistic level and clinically managed.
2.6. SLC25A15 in LDIR Exposure
SLC25A15 has not been extensively investigated in the context of LDIR exposure;
SLC25A15 is noted to be upregulated in some cancers, including bladder carcinomas, gas-
tric cancer, and melanoma [189]. Increased SLC25A15 expression in one study [190] was
associated with a significant inhibition of apoptosis and progression of prostate cancer.
It has been noted that mitochondrial amino acid transporters can effectively reprogram
the metabolism of cancer cells by regulating the flux and creation of anabolites crucial
for rapidly proliferating tumor cells [189]. We have previously reviewed low-dose ra-
diation exposure in the context of ME/CFS [191] and proposed a putative model based
on overlapping biomarkers that integrates possible RIBEs with ROS generation, poten-
tial downstream metabolic and immunologic effects relevant to ME/CFS, and possible
hematopoietic dysregulation that may further be connected to melanoma in the context of
ME/CFS. Additionally, we conducted a broader review of the possible association with
ME/CFS and cancer in an earlier report [192].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
12 of 45
Mechanistically, SLC25A15 is integrated in the same pathways pertinent to low-dose
radiation-induced bystander effects. RIBEs have long been known to involve modula-
tion of cellular metabolism [93,94,153,155,193,194]. RIBEs have been demonstrated to
cause calcium fluxes [89,195,196], reduced mitochondrial metabolism [92,154,194,197],
and programmed cell death in various experimental contexts [198–202]. For example,
a recent study using an ex vivo model found that incubation of cells in irradiated tumor-
conditioned medium found a significant reduction in mitochondrial OXPHOS, ATP pro-
duction, glycolysis, and leucine secretion [193]. It was also found that photonic bystander
signals [150,203,204] directly inhibited the activities of Complexes I and V and inhibited
ATP production in cultured human epithelial cells, which is a finding that coincides with
other RIBE research evidencing the involvement of mitochondrial metabolism in medi-
ating the effect. Further research points to the role of reactive oxygen species (ROSs)
and oxidative stress in RIBEs, which can be generated by mitochondria as a byproduct
of OXPHOS.
It is possible that SLC25A15 could be directly modulated by bystander signals or
even participate in the cellular responses to and propagation of the signal given its crucial
role in cellular metabolism. There is currently a lack of studies in the literature that
indicate the direct involvement of ORNT1 in RIBEs. It is clear that ORNT1 and other
mitochondrial transporters could play a very important role in the mitochondrial aspects
of RIBEs, given the extensive literature strongly supporting mitochondrial involvement
in cellular responses to LDIR and signaling. This is a possible avenue for future research
in ME/CFS and RIBEs that could uncover its importance in mediating or participating in
both. It is likely that, if such research were undertaken, a complex picture of metabolic
modulation in the context of the disease could become evident that would likely elucidate
its etiology further and possibly point to areas of overlap with RIBEs and associated effects.
Because both RIBEs and ME/CFS represent complex biological processes, it is almost
certain that, in a whole organism, any observed adapted energy metabolism is not limited to
specific tissues or processes such as detoxification of ammonia in the liver. It is also evident
that a key area of research in ME/CFS involves the role of immunity in the manifestation
of the disease, along with crosstalk between immune and metabolic pathways. Another
protein that bridges metabolic functions with immunity that has also been identified in
ME/CFS literature is the CD38 glycoprotein.
2.7. CD38 Overview and Possible Connections to ME/CFS
CD38 is a membrane-associated protein found on the surface of many types of im-
mune cells, including monocytes, dendritic cells, granulocytes, B-lymphocytes, and NK
cells [205]. CD38 has two primary known functions: a transmembrane receptor involved
in immunity, and an enzyme assisting in NAD+ catabolism and regulation of intra- and
extracellular NAD+ concentration [205–209]. As a transmembrane receptor, CD38 can
complex with and activate T cells, promoting cytokine production and release [205]. CD38
is also involved in the regulation of B-cell activation in antigen recognition [205]. As an
enzyme, CD38 catalyzes the conversion of NAD+ into ADP ribose (ADPR) and cyclic
ADP ribose, which is believed to serve a crucial role in regulating intracellular NAD+
concentration [207,210]. Additionally, ADPR is known to regulate calcium ion flux as it
binds to and activates TRPM2 [209,211]. NAD+ and its reduced form NADH are well
known in their role as electron carriers and oxidizing agents in glycolysis, pyruvate
oxidation, the TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, beta phosphorylation, and other
catabolic pathways [126,127,212].
Several studies have shown alterations in immune surface cell receptors in ME/CFS
patients [213,214], and ME/CFS has long been suspected to have an immunological com-
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
13 of 45
ponent [215]. One paper using in vitro techniques examined the metabolic profile of B cells
from ME/CFS patients and found lower mitochondrial mass, significant usage of essential
amino acids, and significantly increased expression of CD38 following stimulation com-
pared to healthy control samples [135]. The authors concluded that a stress response was
likely triggered in ME/CFS B cells, resulting in increased usage of substrates for ATP pro-
duction. Another PBMC study [121] found evidence of downregulated interferon signaling
and expression of immunoglobulin genes, suggesting immune suppression in the cohort of
ME/CFS patients used for the study. Another clinical study [213] found significantly higher
expression of both CD38 and ion channel genes crucial for calcium signaling in NK cells
from ME/CFS patients; specifically, TRPM2. Further, baseline cytotoxicity was significantly
reduced in these ME/CFS patients. These findings suggest possible compensatory activity
in ME/CFS in an attempt to ameliorate dysregulation of calcium ion homeostasis and to
promote restoration of NK cytotoxicity, although further research is required to substantiate
this hypothesis. Another research group found that severe ME/CFS was associated with
higher circulating B-lymphocytes along with higher pro-inflammatory cytokines such as
IFN-gamma, TNF, and IL-17 [56]. Another clinical study [216] observed significant changes
in B-cell subtypes, T cells, and other biomarkers, suggesting “significant impairments in
immune regulation in ME/CFS”. Some studies have also tentatively linked these effects to
possible dysregulated metabolism in ME/CFS [25] due to CD38’s dual function as a surface
receptor and regulator of NAD+ within and outside the cell. We discuss these findings
more extensively in a previous review that provides possible connections to diseases such
as melanoma [191].
Overall, increased CD38 expression in various types of immune cells in ME/CFS
patients reported in a number of clinical studies suggests that perhaps persistent immune
stimulation and inflammation may be a common factor in the disease. There appears to be a
broad appreciation in the literature now that immune involvement in most ME/CFS cases is
probable [217]. An interplay between immunity and metabolism is further suspected given
the detection of metabolic abnormalities in the B-cells of ME/CFS patients [135]. A potential
link between immunity and metabolism can be investigated by interrogating CD38’s role
as an enzyme and as a key regulator of NAD+ metabolism. Increased CD38 activity in
the context of inflammation or immune activation likely drives depletion of NAD+ [218],
which is required for normal cellular metabolism. It is suspected, though not yet confirmed,
that depletion of NAD+ can also disrupt mitochondrial function in ME/CFS [219]. Indeed,
reduced NAD+ is associated with decreased oxidative phosphorylation (and ATP synthesis),
a possible greater reliance on glycolysis, compensatory shifts in metabolism, and ultimately
dysfunction of immune cells [207,220,221]. However, this putative cascade has yet to be
extensively investigated in the context of ME/CFS.
In a recent clinical pilot study [222], a select cohort of ME/CFS patients were admin-
istered the anti-CD38 antibody daratumumab. The authors found that six patients of ten
experienced considerable improvements in their symptoms, with four patients experienc-
ing no significant clinical changes. They demonstrated that a reduction in serum IgG levels
was associated with self-reported clinical improvement, while low baseline NK-cell counts
were associated with a lack of clinical response to the drug. These findings are a positive
development in the testing of effective treatments for some ME/CFS cases, but further re-
search is required to determine efficacy across patient cohorts and larger sample sizes [223].
Moreover, further research is required to determine whether altering CD38-related immune
pathways could benefit at least a subset of ME/CFS patients in broader clinical practice.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
14 of 45
2.8. CD38 in RIBE
CD38 has not yet been extensively investigated for potential involvement in RIBEs.
Further, there is overall limited current evidence for the role of LDIR and RIBEs in al-
tering organism immunity [224]. This is likely because a majority of such immunolog-
ical studies focus on dose ranges pertinent to tumor radiotherapy, where higher doses
of radiation are typically employed for killing tumor cells. Due to comparatively less
focus on low-dose effects, where RIBEs are observed as the predominant biological ef-
fect in most experimental contexts, there is very little research on the interplay between
the immune system and RIBEs. Much research has been conducted in vitro on bone
marrow stem cells and cells of related lineage that were indispensable in first demon-
strating and further elucidating RIBEs and radiation-induced genomic instability (RIGE),
among other related LDIR effects. It is likely, given the effects observed in in vitro mod-
els, that immune signaling is modulated by RIBEs and other LDIR effects, even if our
current understanding of RIBEs in radiation and immune therapy responses is incom-
plete [225]. Multiple groups have observed varied effects of RIBEs both in vitro and
in vivo models, which include modulation of cellular metabolism [93,94,193,226,227],
the modulation of mitochondrial metabolism [92,154,155,193,194], the production of re-
active oxygen species [89,95,98,154–156,194,228], exosome signaling [146–151], calcium
fluxes [89,195,196], the induction of apoptosis [198–200,228], cell-cycle arrest [226,229],
and the release of secondary signals that perpetuate responses in neighboring, LDIR-
unexposed cells.
These mechanistic observations and evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies war-
rant a further investigation of multifunctional proteins such as CD38 in the context of
LDIR responses and disease. CD38, as previously described, is intimately involved in both
immune regulation and in controlling levels of intra- and extracellular NAD+, which is
a crucial electron carrier involved in virtually all aspects of normal cellular metabolism.
In addition, CD38 catalyzes the formation of products that activate calcium channels (i.e.,
TRPM2 via ADPR), which are crucial in normal calcium signaling. The loss of CD38
function has been clinically associated with impaired immune responses, dysfunctional
metabolism, and impaired mitochondrial function [230,231]. It would be very interest-
ing to further probe the role of CD38 in RIBEs and determine how its function modu-
lates NAD+ availability, mitochondrial health, and calcium fluxes to potentially facilitate
observed effects.
It is known that many different enzymes and metabolites coordinate to maintain
metabolic homeostasis under normal conditions. Another potential candidate biomarker of
interest that integrates mitochondrial metabolism, immune function, and the cell cycle is
cyclin D1.
2.9. Cyclin D1 Overview and Possible Role in ME/CFS
Cyclin D1 (CCND1) is a protein that regulates the cell cycle via complexation with
specific cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK4 or CDK6) [232]. Complexed cyclin D1 regulates
the transition from G1 to S phase by inactivating tumor suppressor proteins (such as
pRb, p21) via phosphorylation or sequestration and allowing E2F transcription factors
to transcribe S phase genes [232]. In cancers, the overexpression of cyclin D1 correlates
with tumor progression and protection from apoptosis. Due to genomic instability present
in most cancers, the amplification or translocation of oncogenes (including CCND1) and
consequent overexpression is a common biomarker for prognosis [233]. In B-cell lymphoma,
for example, CCND1 is usually translocated upstream of the IgH promoter, and similar
chromosomal translocations are observed in some cases of multiple myeloma [233,234].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
15 of 45
Cyclin D1 also binds to several nuclear receptors independently of CDK4/6 and
thereby modulates hormonal signaling, cell growth, proliferation, and differentiation [235].
Increased cyclin D1 is observed in cells during the G1/S phase transition due to signaling
in both Ras-driven mitogenic pathways and other pathways [236–238]. There is also some
evidence of cyclin D1 in epigenetic transcriptional regulation; cyclin D1 has been observed
binding to histone acetylases and deacetylases, which regulate the expression of genes
involved in differentiation and cell proliferation [235]. It is, therefore, more appropriate
to describe cyclin D1 as a regulator of the cell cycle, transcription, histone code, and
metabolism, and as a signaling molecule sensitive to numerous growth factors, cytokines,
and stress signals [235,239].
The multifunctional role of cyclin D1 is relevant to discuss here because some of
the cell types examined in ME/CFS research do not actively divide (e.g., skeletal muscle
fibers). In terms of potential causes of fatigue-related symptoms and immune dysfunction,
the possible involvement of cyclin D1 in ME/CFS can be linked to mitochondrial path-
ways. Research has shown that aberrant cyclin D1 expression can cause mitochondrial
dysfunction [240], the suppression of mitochondrial OXPHOS [241], altered immune cell
function [242], and increased cellular stress signaling [243]. This is likely due to the complex
role of cyclin D1 (-CDK4/6) in regulating cellular growth and metabolism. Cyclin D1-
CDK4/6 can phosphorylate and inactivate PGC-1α, which is a transcriptional coactivator
crucial for mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism. Conversely, the overex-
pression of PGC-1α can increase cyclin D1 levels since PGC-1α increases ATP production
but can also work to decrease oxidative stress through the expression of genes involved in
free-radical scavenging, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) [244–246]. The inhibition of
PGC-1α may result in reduced numbers of mitochondria, decreased respiratory capacity,
and the impaired production of ATP [247–251]. As such, PGC-1α has been identified as a
protein of interest in ME/CFS research [138,252,253], although much work must be done to
determine whether an aberrant function of PGC-1α is present in most ME/CFS patients
and whether aberrant cyclin D1 activity plays a role in any observed effect since there is
little primary research on ME/CFS patients and models currently.
Cyclin D1 is known to widely reprogram cellular metabolism for the G1/S phase tran-
sition. The expression of cyclin D1 in this context promotes glycolysis, reduced OXPHOS,
and more shunting of metabolites to anabolic pathways such as the pentose phosphate
pathway. As described previously, several studies have demonstrated similar metabolic
shifts in the immune and muscle cells of ME/CFS patients [136,252,254–256], although
none so far have proposed a link to potentially aberrant cyclin D1 activity.
Several studies have indicated that ME/CFS patients appear to have chronic, low-
grade immune activation, and many others have demonstrated the involvement of the
immune system in the disease [10,22,26,28,118,120,121,131,135,138,139,217]. The expression
of cyclin D1 can be mediated by the activation of IL-6 and TNF-α signaling, which also
activates mitogenic growth pathways [257]. Additional research is required to establish a
connection to cyclin D1 activity in the context of ME/CFS. Oxidative stress or the dysregu-
lation of redox homeostasis, however, has been directly implicated in ME/CFS in a few
studies [5,28]. In theory, with chronic low-grade immune activation, cyclin D1 expression
can also be sustained, which could possibly drive the effects observed in ME/CFS studies,
but there does not appear to be a study currently linking abnormal cyclin D1 expression or
signaling to ME/CFS, and much additional preclinical and clinical research is required to
substantiate this hypothesis. As with ORNT1 and CD38, the integrated and multifunctional
role that cyclin D1 plays in cellular metabolism, the cell cycle, and the signaling pathways
suggests that it may be involved in ME/CFS in at least a subset of patients.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
16 of 45
2.10. Cyclin D1 and Connections to LDIR Effects
Cyclin D1 has been investigated considerably in the context of high-dose radiation
effects due to its role in several cancers and potential as a target in cancer radiother-
apy [234,237,238,245]. However, many studies have demonstrated that cellular regulation
of cyclin D1 within radiation responses is highly dependent on dosage, with differential
regulation observed at doses within the RIBE range. An interesting study [258] found that
cyclin D1 is degraded in tumor cells following a high radiation dose of 10 Gy, whereas
it was actually stabilized when the same human tumor cells were exposed to a 500 mGy
fractionated dose over the course of several weeks. The authors of this study also discussed
the finding that cyclin D1 overexpression occurs as a radiation-induced adaptive response
(RIAR) in the context of adaptation to fractionated doses, and that overexpression of cyclin
D1 also results in genomic instability in the irradiated cells. The authors further deduce
that repression of cyclin D1 expression is “likely to cancel the harmful effects of long-term
exposure to [fractionated radiation doses]”, and therefore, cyclin D1 may be used as a
potential biomarker of long-term exposure to radiation [258]. Another study [259] found
similar bimodal cyclin D1 regulation in human keratinocytes that depended on dosage;
cyclin D1 was found to be induced by LDIR (100 mGy X-radiation) and localized to the
cytoplasm, while higher doses (5 Gy gamma-radiation) resulted in nuclear accumulation.
The authors also concluded that, likely through direct association with the pro-apoptotic
Bax protein, cyclin D1 can improve inner mitochondrial membrane potential in cells ex-
posed to low doses and thereby promotes an anti-apoptotic response in stressed cells [259].
As a crucial regulator of the cell cycle, apoptotic signaling, and cellular metabolism, these
observations make sense because low doses of ionizing radiation are known to affect cells
differently than high doses [260–266].
In the context of RIBEs and other LDIR research, these findings of the bimodal regula-
tion of cyclin D1 are not surprising. Many LDIR studies have reported, for decades now,
that cellular responses are highly context-dependent and are essentially disparate when
compared to high-dose effects where the primary deleterious biological effects stem from
direct or indirect DNA damage and responses (repair, programmed death, etc.) to this dam-
age. These data are also further evidence that the LNT model, which still informs much of
radiation protection and practical medical concepts of radiation exposure on health, cannot
be used to adequately capture the complexity of cellular or organismal effects below the low-
dose threshold. While this is obviously not direct evidence that low doses of radiation could
potentially be a stressor associated with ME/CFS pathogenesis and/or maintenance of
pathophysiological processes, it is abundantly clear that our current understanding of low-
dose radiation effects, RIARs, and RIBEs must be enhanced with additional research to pre-
clude or maybe even eventually confirm this possibility. Given the existing research point-
ing to similar syndromes in populations exposed to low doses [62,63,106] and commonali-
ties in observed biological effects between low-dose RIBEs and ME/CFS, including altered
cellular and mitochondrial metabolism [93,94,125,138,139,155,193,194], the regulation of mi-
tochondrial membrane potential [131,138,154,155,267], the induction of cellular stress path-
ways [28,118,153,197,267], the generation of reactive oxygen species [86,87,93,143,268–272],
the emergent albeit significant observed effects on specific OXPHOS enzymes (e.g., mi-
tochondrial respiratory complexes) [124,128,132,136,138,154,155,267], the involvement of
cytokine and exosome signaling [140,146–148,150], and other processes covered in this
review, we believe that further investigation is warranted in this area and may prove highly
fruitful in furthering our understanding of LDIR effects and how these effects may possibly
be implicated in ME/CFS with additional research.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
17 of 45
2.11. Alpha-Synuclein Overview and Possible Connections to ME/CFS
Potentially bridging putative neurological effects, alpha-synuclein (α-syn) is a neu-
ronal, membrane-associated protein that is believed to be closely involved in the regulation
of synaptic vesicles. This effect has been observed primarily in dopaminergic neurons [273].
Though its role is not completely understood, in healthy neuronal tissue, α-syn localizes
to presynaptic terminals and mediates the mobility and clustering of synaptic vesicle
pools [274]. Through this activity, α-syn is believed to play a buffering role in neurotrans-
mitter release. It also plays a role in SNARE complex assembly and stabilization, where it
is believed to function similarly to a chaperone protein by ensuring the efficiency of the ma-
chinery that facilitates vesicle fusion under conditions of repeated neuronal firing [275,276].
A-synuclein has also been demonstrated to modulate dopamine synthesis and functions
to limit the concentration of cytosolic dopamine in presynaptic boutons; this is because
high concentrations can result in the generation of ROSs and other toxic metabolites and cy-
tokines through monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity [277,278]. MAO is bound to the outer
membranes of mitochondria in most human tissues [279,280]. Further, high concentrations
of dopamine can cause the formation of highly reactive dopamine quinones (DAQs), either
enzymatically or via auto-oxidation. Some of these byproducts of elevated dopamine
concentrations and dopamine catabolism, especially 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde
(DOPAL) generated by MAO and in close proximity to mitochondria, can result in the
induction of mitochondrial membrane permeability, the attenuation of mitochondrial Com-
plex I and respiration, and the loss of inner membrane potential [277,279–286]. In turn,
these effects may promote apoptotic signaling, the increased generation of ROS, further
oxidative insult, and the pathological aggregation of α-syn in neurodegenerative disease,
specifically PD [280,281,283–286]. It is conceivable that these effects could generate a posi-
tive feedback loop of ROS generation and stress signaling that may cause the degradation of
dopaminergic neurons and contribute to or cause PD [284–286], although these mechanisms
are still under investigation in the PD literature today.
There are a few additional areas of research into the normal and pathological function
of α-syn that are still emerging and are, as of now, less established. Some research suggests
that α-syn could be involved in vesicle transport between the endoplasmic reticulum and
the Golgi body, as well as mitochondrial dynamics, which likely involve membrane interac-
tions [276,287]. Additionally, some research suggests that defective α-syn can potentially
translocate to the nucleus and may indirectly prevent the shuttling of key proteins involved
in transcriptional regulation, such as DNMT3A [288–291]. However, these effects are still
under investigation, and their relevance to disease is unclear.
There is currently no strong evidence that dysfunctional α-syn is present in ME/CFS.
There is nevertheless potential in researching the possible dysregulation of α-syn in
ME/CFS; because it sits at an interesting position linking neuronal signaling, membrane
interactions, mitochondrial biology, and redox stress, identifying patterns of expression
in patient cohorts could help isolate subgroups where neuronal symptoms remain un-
explained. Additionally, due to its sensitivity to redox stress, α-syn function could be
a candidate biomarker for redox imbalance assays in ME/CFS if future work identifies
deleterious α-syn function in ME/CFS patients.
Currently, no studies have established this connection. One particular case report
published several years ago concerning an autopsy of a patient who had died with a
prior diagnosis of ME/CFS found several neuropathological abnormalities, including a
loss of white matter and several axonic aberrations [292]. The study further described
considerable tissue insult in white and gray matter and prominent amyloid deposits with
neurofibrillary tangles present in the frontal cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus. Though
the authors did not identify the involvement of α-syn directly, they argued that these
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
18 of 45
findings warrant further studies into CNS diseases that may be associated with ME/CFS or
ostensible presentation of ME/CFS.
Mitochondrial dysfunction could again possibly serve as a mechanistic link. A-syn
localizes to the outer mitochondrial membrane, especially under conditions of cellular
stress [293,294]. The overexpression or misfolding of α-syn has been shown to impair
Complex I activity and ATP production [293–295]. Oxidative stress has been demonstrated
to promote α-syn misfolding and appears to be exacerbated by it as well. As previously re-
viewed, many ME/CFS studies report reduced mitochondrial efficiency [128,132,152], aber-
rant mitochondrial function including oxidative phosphorylation [124,125,136,254,296,297],
and redox imbalances [123,129,143,255,268,270,271,298,299]. It could be that these pro-
cesses somehow promote subclinical α-syn misfolding, and while not producing the same
aggregation threshold seen in PD, the alteration of conformation or localization of α-syn
may occur in some cases and could possibly contribute to observed neuroinflammatory
effects. Further research is needed to demonstrate that this could be a mechanism in some
ME/CFS cases, as research in the area is sparse.
A-syn also plays a role in neuroinflammation and innate immune response. The
protein is expressed in immune cells, including microglia and monocytes. In vitro, pico-
molar concentrations of α-syn aggregates were demonstrated to sensitize toll-like receptor
4 (TLR4) in a model of PD [300]. Many studies have investigated this pathway in the
context of PD [300–303] and furthered the idea that misfolded α-syn may act as a damage-
associated molecular pattern (DAMP), leading to the triggering of immune responses
in PD. It is interesting to note that low-grade neuroinflammation and innate immune
activation appear to be present in most ME/CFS patients, according to several clinical
studies [17,25,119,120,215,216,304]. It is possible that very low levels of α-syn aggregates
could promote neuroinflammation in ME/CFS, although further research is required to
justify this hypothesis experimentally.
Without additional research, α-syn remains a possible biomarker that could be relevant
to ME/CFS. There exist no postmortem studies examining α-syn expression or confor-
mation that have demonstrated evidence of involvement to our knowledge. Further, no
studies of CSF or plasma samples from ME/CFS patients exist that have examined α-syn
expression or conformation. In PD patients, some studies have shown an association be-
tween oligomeric α-syn in CSF and plasma and the severity of fatigue symptoms [305,306].
We propose overall that more research in this area could provide useful information on
the disease mechanisms associated with ME/CFS and whether aberrant α-syn activity is
relevant to the manifestation of fatigue symptoms.
2.12. Alpha-Synuclein and Radiation Exposure
In radiation therapy, the upregulation of α-syn is associated with fatigue symp-
toms [307]. Idiopathic PD is believed to involve many different environmental factors,
including ionizing radiation exposure; possible LDIR mechanisms are still under investi-
gation [308,309]. One study even found that low-energy EM radiation can promote α-syn
aggregation, oxidative stress, and cytotoxic effects in human neuroblastoma cells [310],
although further research is required to confirm these findings.
It is possible that low-dose radiation exposures could affect the monomer-to-oligomer
regulatory mechanisms in cells and thereby contribute to abnormal function, although
much additional research is required to substantiate this idea.
3. Recommendations for Future Research
ME/CFS is a complex disease that likely involves many aspects of cellular metabolism
and mitochondrial dynamics, immune and inflammatory processes, and neurological
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
19 of 45
mechanisms that, together, contribute to a diseased state. Further, because no universal
set of accepted criteria for ME/CFS diagnosis exists, patient groups in studies are likely to
be heterogeneous in presentation. Here, we propose future research directions that could
assist in efforts to determine how the reviewed biomarkers could potentially be involved
in ME/CFS and how stressors such as LDIR exposure could possibly be implicated in
ME/CFS through these mechanisms. Figure 2 illustrates the hypothesis that LDIR exposure
could induce diverse cellular responses in distant tissues through RIBE signal propagation.
Figure 2. A representation of how a stressor or set of stressors affecting one tissue could possibly give
rise to diverse effects in distant tissues via signal propagation. An initial stressor, such as ionizing
radiation (IR), is known to be capable of inducing the secretion of exosomes (a), soluble factors (b),
and UV biophotons (c) from cells in the context of RIBEs. Exposure to these stressors could promote
further secondary signaling in bystander cells (d), as has been reported in the literature and discussed
in this review. The communication of these stress signals could, in theory, produce effects in distant
tissues through circulating factors or even promote maintenance of the diseased state in response
to additional cellular stress events. This model has yet to be confirmed in the etiology of ME/CFS;
however, we hypothesize that these effects could possibly promote establishment of an “ME/CFS
Adapted Cell Phenotype” in patients that promotes emergence of symptoms and disease progression.
3.1. Putative Biomarkers of Interest in ME/CFS and RIBE Research
Firstly, diagnostic criteria must be standardized across studies. A core set of diagnos-
tic criteria must first be adopted to ensure that patients with representative “canonical”
symptoms (i.e., post-exertional malaise) can be assessed. The Canadian Consensus Criteria
or the IOM Criteria should be employed and strictly adhered to due to their relatively
conservative criteria [8]. However, to capture ME/CFS patients that may not fit standard
diagnostic criteria but still fit the broad symptomatology of ME/CFS, we believe an ad-
ditional group should be included to capture atypical presentations if comorbidities are
excluded [8,9,311]. While this group may not present all the typical symptoms and possibly
present varied pathophysiologies and biomarker profiles, evaluating similar biomarkers
between the groups could still potentially reveal common or divergent areas of underlying
dysfunction. The establishment of a secure, shared database open to ME/CFS researchers
could prove invaluable in future studies. A positive development over the past few years
has been the founding of a UK ME/CFS biobank [162,312], which aggregates ME/CFS
specimens along with comprehensive patient health profiles, which has already led to
considerable research interest and the analysis of samples [313–317]. Research efforts such
as these establish the foundations required for enabling full cross-study meta-analyses on
ME/CFS.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
20 of 45
Alongside this database, the recruitment of large prospective cohorts of individuals
with detailed histories of radiation exposure should also be performed. As previously
reviewed, these would include nuclear workers, medical radiology patients, Chernobyl
and Fukushima survivors, and atomic veterans. A comprehensive data collection would
include documenting the extent of exposure, comprehensive health histories, including any
comorbidities, and any existing symptoms or history of symptoms that overlap ME/CFS.
This would further allow the stratification of participants into subgroups that correlate
with ME/CFS subtypes.
3.2. Integrating Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Metabolomics, and Epigenomics
Considerable sample collection would need to be undertaken for these studies to cover
various biomarkers and tissues with suspected relevance to ME/CFS. The establishment of a
repository of whole blood samples (for PBMCs, other biomarkers), skeletal muscle biopsies,
CSF, urine samples, and others would facilitate further research and metabolic profiling
of patients. A focus on PBMCs and skeletal muscle would involve cellular bioenergetics
biomarkers with an emphasis on quantifying mitochondrial function. Additionally, data on
ORNT1 activity, CD38 expression and activity, cyclin D1 localization, and α-syn regulation
and oligomerization should be collected and analyzed against healthy controls. Targeted
assays for lactate/pyruvate ratios, TCA intermediates, amino acids (orthinine, arginine),
NAD+/NADH, the urea cycle, and oxidative stress markers should also be conducted to
establish detailed metabolic profiles of patients. In blood and other samples, evaluation
of DNA methylation patterns in PBMCs and non-coding RNAs present in circulating
exosomes could be useful in determining whether circulating DAMPs modulate these
effects, which seems to have been suggested by previous studies [140].
3.3. Exosome Profiling
The characterization of exosome content can serve as a method to identify ME/CFS
and RIBE biomarkers and mitochondrial dysfunction, as well as the propagation of damage
signals. The quantification of exosomal mtDNA, miRNA, lncRNA, and protein cargo
(e.g., ROS, α-syn, inflammatory cytokines) could be conducted in plasma before and after
controlled exercise tests. These results could be compared with exposure to bystander
signals or low-dose radiation in vitro and with samples from radiation-exposed cohorts
to uncover any potential overlap. Exosome profiles can then be correlated with symptom
severity, post-exertional malaise, and the presence of additional circulating inflammatory
cytokines to further build out this model. Furthermore, the in vitro testing of ICCM and
serum from ME/CFS patients using cultured reporter cells could help elucidate whether
signaling cascades in RIBEs and ME/CFS share overlap or if any disparities exist.
3.4. Functional Mitochondrial and Calcium Assays in Patient-Derived Cells
The collection of PBMCs and B-lymphocytes from ME/CFS patients and radiation-
exposed cohorts could prove useful in determining functional mitochondrial impairments
and correlation with fatigue symptoms. Additional endpoints can be incorporated to ana-
lyze the role of calcium fluxes or whether aberrant signaling is present in these samples. The
measurement of basal and maximum respiration, ATP production, and proton leak can be
conducted in real time using extracellular flux assays (such as Seahorse XF) [318,319]. Mito-
chondrial potential can be measured using the JC-1 fluorescence assay among other assays
for the verification of apoptotic signaling via loss of inner mitochondrial membrane poten-
tial [320–322]. ROS generation can be measured via several methods, such as live dichlo-
rofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA) fluorescence microscopy or using MitoSOX [323–325].
Further, fluorescence-based calcium flux assays using stains such as Fura-2 AM [326,327]
can be pursued to determine whether any correlation exists between this signaling and mi-
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
21 of 45
tochondrial function in patient groups. These assays should also be repeated in vitro using
radiation- and bystander signal-exposed cells to confirm any potential findings. Moreover,
the supplementation of NAD+ precursors (such as nicotinamide riboside, nicotinamide
mononucleotide) or PGC-1α agonists should be tested for potential rescue of mitochondrial
function if any impairments are detected.
3.5. Mechanistic Studies of RIBEs on Immune–Metabolic Crosstalk
In order to further connect low-dose effects to immune function, an additional in vitro
investigation is required. The use of a co-culture system of irradiated immortalized cells
and PBMCs can be used to investigate this connection. The generation of bystander signals
upon irradiation can be observed by assessing the release of exosomes, ROSs, and cytokines
from exposed cells [96,146–149,153]. Further assays on bystander cells, including metabolic
effects (i.e., NAD+ levels), mitochondrial respiration, and inflammatory responses, can
then be conducted before and after manipulation of CD38 activity to assess whether
such manipulation promotes or attenuates bystander effects. The attenuation of CD38
activity can be accomplished by small molecule inhibitors such as daratumumab [222].
The additional characterization of ORNT1 expression and activity in irradiated cells or
knockdown of SLC25A15 could be used to further link these effects to mitochondrial
function. These models can be further improved by incorporating animal models of
fatigue [188] and investigating the role of LDIR exposure in the modulation of fatigue
symptoms and biomarker profiles.
3.6. Mechanistic Studies of RIBEs on Cyclin D1 Activity
The apparent bimodal activity of cyclin D1 between high and low radiation doses
warrants further investigation in the context of RIBEs [258,259]. The expression and local-
ization of cyclin D1 can be evaluated in PBMCs from radiation-exposed and non-exposed
groups. These results can be compared to PBMC samples from ME/CFS groups to assess
whether there are any similarities or significant differences in the regulatory activity of
cyclin D1 upon low-dose radiation exposure.
3.7. Further Exploration of α-Synuclein as a Neuroinflammatory Biomarker
Previous studies have shown that incredibly minute quantities of α-syn aggre-
gates can sensitize microglia via TLR4 and TLR2 and promote neuroinflammatory re-
sponses [300,302,303]. The measurement of CSF and plasma oligomeric α-syn should be
conducted in all patient cohorts; this can then be correlated with neurocognitive scores,
sleep quality, and fatigue severity. This could help elucidate whether oligomeric α-syn is
potentially involved in these symptoms and whether a dose threshold exists for manifesta-
tion of these effects. Further research can be conducted in vitro using neuronal cell lines
such as T98G to determine whether LDIR exposure or bystander signaling can produce a
similar effect. Of course, these studies could include additional metabolomic and transcrip-
tomic characterization to potentially connect these effects to other pathways suspected in
ME/CFS pathogenesis.
3.8. Linking Clinical Phenotypes to Molecular Subtypes
Once considerable preliminary data has been collected, a computational analysis
could be conducted to segregate clinical phenotypes and associated biomarkers. This
could be achieved by machine learning processes, such as unsupervised clustering of
multi-omics data to identify molecular subgroups within ME/CFS, as previous studies
have attempted [19,116]. For example, categories could include “immune-driven”, “mi-
tochondrial deficit-driven”, and/or “neuroinflammatory” subgroups and groups that
overlap these categories. These clusters can be validated against clinical metrics employed
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
22 of 45
in ME/CFS, such as the duration of post-exertional malaise, exercise intolerance, and
neurocognitive deficits. These efforts could help develop a panel of biomarker tests for
ME/CFS and effectively cluster patients into different subtypes, which could then inform
further research and eventually clinical management options based on the underlying
observed abnormalities in metabolism, immunity, and neurocognition.
3.9. Development and Testing of Targeted Interventions
Following the clustering of molecular subtypes of ME/CFS, the clinical testing of
various therapies can proceed. Further pilot trials of anti-CD38 therapy in stratified sub-
groups could be promising in some cases [135,222]; in these studies, the monitoring of
immune phenotypes, cytokine profiles, and mitochondrial function should be performed
as well to determine any modulatory effects. The modulation of metabolism in some cases
of ME/CFS could ameliorate fatigue and associated symptoms. The supplementation of
diet with NAD+ precursors and antioxidant compounds could be employed to determine
whether this provides benefit to any patients; however, more prospective research is needed
to determine whether such efforts are likely to be effective in most patients.
3.10. Creation of a Centralized ME/CFS-Radiation Exposure Registry
With the establishment of an ME/CFS database and considerable historical data on
individuals exposed to ionizing radiation, longitudinal studies could be conducted on radi-
ation dose (incorporating personal dosimetry, medical imaging records), infection history,
lifestyle factors, symptoms, and clinical outcomes for patients. This would enable real-time
epidemiological analyses to detect any dose-responsive relationships with ME/CFS-like
symptom clusters.
3.11. Additional Research Recommendations
It is clear that research into the causes of ME/CFS and underlying molecular mech-
anisms can only be successful if a truly interdisciplinary approach is used. Such efforts
would involve coordinating many different researchers and clinicians from a variety of
subdisciplines. The formation of a consortium combining clinicians, molecular biologists,
radiation physicists, epidemiologists, bioinformaticians, and patient advocacy groups
would assist in streamlining future research efforts. The ability to share raw datasets
via secure platforms would also be an asset to strengthen future findings. Further, the
publishing of and adherence to various standard operating procedures for assays and other
procedures would help ensure reproducibility between groups.
Eventually, we envision the use of emerging evidence to refine guidelines on low-
dose radiation safety (e.g., occupational limits) and on screening for fatigue syndromes
in radiation-exposed populations. The incorporation of routine assessment of immune–
metabolic biomarkers into clinical care pathways for patients presenting with unexplained
chronic fatigue would be beneficial.
4. A Hypothetical Model for the Induction and Maintenance of ME/CFS
upon Low-Dose Radiation Exposure
In this next section, we propose a potential model for how ME/CFS pathogenesis
could possibly emerge as a result of research into the various putative biomarkers covered
in this review. This model is hypothetical but serves to tie together the various players
and processes relevant to ME/CFS which are associated with emerging research. It should
be noted that much additional research is required to substantiate this model; however,
we hope that discussing the potential links between these pathways could assist future
research in connecting crosstalk between these pathways and identifying other studies in
the literature that have investigated similar effects.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
23 of 45
4.1. Exposure to Stressors and Potential Downstream Effects
An initial stressor promotes one or more dysfunctional metabolic or signaling pro-
cesses in affected tissues. This could be the result of an infection [26,32,34], the per-
sistence of an inflammatory state from a previous infection [118,119,129], or radiation
exposure [62,63,104–106]. It could also be that a combination of stressors can contribute
to the initiation of the pathological state. This stressor or set of stressors that can con-
tribute, though infection and others have been linked, is still unknown. For example,
ionizing radiation exposure could promote the modulation of adaptive responses at low
doses [259,328–330], which are mediated by the immune system [96,331–335]. This could
lead to an adaptive or radioprotective response in exposed tissues or bystander cells re-
ceiving signals from directly exposed cells. This process could, for example, involve the
promotion of CD38 expression or maintenance of CD38 expression, which has been linked
to radioresistance in cancer cells [206,207,210,218,220,231]; increased CD38 activity or ex-
pression has been observed in ME/CFS patients as well in some studies [135,222]. This
expression could possibly drive the depletion of NAD+, leading to downstream modu-
lation of cellular metabolism and mitochondrial effects in tissues directly affected by the
stressor. CD38 upregulation drives the downstream modulation of cellular metabolism and
mitochondrial effects via depletion of NAD+, which is, as covered previously, required as
an oxidizing agent in glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, the TCA cycle, oxidative phosphoryla-
tion, beta phosphorylation, and other catabolic pathways [126,127,212,230]. Figure 3 shows
a potential model for these effects that could, in theory, facilitate localized tissue damage,
modulation of inflammation and immunity, neurological effects, and metabolic alterations
in ME/CFS.
Figure 3. A diagram of a possible model for emergence of ME/CFS upon exposure to ionizing
radiation. Exposure to IR triggers an exaggerated stress response in proximal cells, which induces
a broader inflammatory response and, in turn, modulates CD38 activity in affected cells. Aberrant
α-syn aggregation may be mediated directly by IR or possibly a secondary effect of inflammatory
processes or Abnormal Immune Response (AIR). Circulating damage-associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs; such as α-syn) may convey this stress response to distant tissues. Further research is
required to confirm this signaling cascade and its possible relevance to the health effects of low-dose
radiation exposure and ME/CFS.
In terms of specific effects observed in ME/CFS patients, and by way of example, B-cell
abnormalities have been noted in many ME/CFS studies [216,336–341]. Pregerminal (naïve)
B cells often express CD38; however, this expression gradually decreases as they mature into
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
24 of 45
memory or antibody-secreting cells [342–345]. Exposure to low doses of ionizing radiation
or bystander signal could promote radioresistance [346–348] yet ultimately compromise the
metabolic homeostasis of these cells [135,230]. Other proteins may be affected in response to
a stressor or set of stressors, such as cyclin D1 in LDIR responses [258,259]. The downstream
dysregulation of OXPHOS and CD38 activity [208,218,220,221,231] in neuronal tissues may
lead to minute quantities of alpha-synuclein oligomers, which act as DAMPs that further
promote a neuroinflammatory state [275,279,280,284–286,294,295,300,349].
From this initial tissue insult by the stressor or stressors, downstream effects can
ensue, and signal propagation may continue to pass stress responses to other areas of the
body [56,115,122,140,179,304]. This may also be perpetuated upon exposure to additional
stressors following the initial exposure, or repeated exposures to the same stressor. For
example, the secretion of bystander factors (e.g., exosomes) from cells exposed to bystander
factors (signal propagation) or directly irradiated cells communicates ROS [97,98,272],
cytokines [96,335], miRNAs [146,149], mtDNA [147], other damage signals to secondary by-
stander cells [150,198,203,204,350,351], and potentially ones far away from the site of initial
exposure; signal propagation continues. Immune dysregulation and the receipt of inflam-
matory signals drive the upregulation of CD38 in response, which drives mitochondrial
dysfunction due to a depletion in NAD+ in various tissues. Oxidative phosphorylation
is also potentially affected, along with other metabolic pathways. Compensatory shifts in
metabolism occur to cover deficiencies in energy and substrate production.
The upregulation of CD38 also occurs in immune responses, which could account
for higher expression observed in ME/CFS patients and the theme of persistent low-
level immune activation in ME/CFS [17,25,119,135,205,208,214–216,218,304]. Increased
consumption of NAD+ due to dysregulation of CD38 also results in increased synthesis of
ADPR [207,210], which activates TRPM2, a mitochondrial channel crucial for calcium signal-
ing and apoptotic responses [209,211]. It should be noted that TRPM2 is highly expressed
in the central nervous system [352–354], which could partly account for pathological neuro-
logical effects if further investigated and confirmed experimentally [355–357]. In response
to oxidative stress across various tissues (due to metabolic modulation and stress signaling),
additional proteins are activated, such as PARP, which also generates TRPM2 agonists (intra-
cellular ADP-ribose) [352,355–357]. Additional pathways are affected by this dysregulation,
and this could also affect further degradation of redox homeostasis. The dysregulation
of metabolism promotes a dysregulated immune response with evidence of persistent
low-level activation. Immune responses may be additionally triggered via subsequent or
concurrent stressors, such as viral infection. CD38 mediates inflammatory responses in in-
nate immune cells like neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages, helping control infections
by influencing their recruitment and function at infection sites [135,205,208,218,343,344].
The altered metabolism and triggering of immune responses may result in energy depletion
and a “vicious cycle” of low-grade immune activation, persistence of adaptive response
to the stressor via signal propagation, and depletion of substrates and energy used for
normal metabolism.
Long-term, low-dose exposure to a stressor (such as radiation) can promote the dys-
regulation of cyclin D1 in affected tissues [258,259]. Cyclin D1 expression in repeated
LDIR exposure is stabilized, and this promotes a RIAR [258,259]. Cyclin D1 localizes to
the nucleus and coordinates with BAX to inhibit apoptotic signaling [358–362]. This may
occur in PBMCs in response to damage signals, which might also entail the metabolic repro-
gramming of these cells that could affect their function [216,337–341,363]. The upregulation
of CD38 as a RIAR to LDIR, damage responses, and other stressors may also occur. The
dysregulation of OXPHOS may promote highly toxic alpha-synuclein oligomerization in
neuronal tissue, which, while not at the levels of clinical PD, promotes inflammatory re-
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
25 of 45
sponses as extracellular DAMPs in neuronal tissues [275,279,280,284–286,294,295,300,349].
The intracellular modulation of mitochondrial metabolism may also occur via membrane
associations of alpha-synuclein [279,280,284,285,293,294]. The stabilization of cyclin D1 as a
stress-adaptive response promotes cellular metabolic reprogramming and modulates cellu-
lar growth, proliferation, and differentiation in various affected tissues [258,259]. Cyclin D1
may promote the shunting of metabolites to anabolic pathways and away from catabolic,
ATP-generating pathways, contributing to the persistence of the dysregulated state of
metabolism [244,245]. PGC-1α may be phosphorylated and inactivated by complexed
cyclin D1 to further promote these effects [249–251]. Further, the epigenetic regulation and
reprogramming of gene expression via histone code may occur via cyclin D1 activity [235]
to further entrench the altered metabolism and, consequently, the diseased state.
4.2. Signal Cascade
Damage responses may initially be relatively muted and considered subclinical in
ME/CFS. Genetic predisposition or synergistic effects due to a combination of stressors
may promote the emergence of clinical disease [161,313,316,364]. The assortment and order
of these stressors, or the number of repeated instances of a single kind of stressor, required
to produce clinical disease are likely highly variable between individuals. However, the
emergence of a concerted hypometabolic and neurocognitive response occurs when some
unknown threshold is met. This threshold is likely highly variable because of comorbidities,
lifestyle, or genetic factors. This could also partially account for the heterogeneity of
biomarker profiles in ME/CFS patients in many studies [15,256,365].
Damage signal propagation leads to effects all over the body via circulating exosomes
(which carry various factors) [140], inflammatory cytokines [122,140,304,366,367], PBMCs
that may produce secondary signals, and potentially other factors, such as alpha-synuclein
acting as a DAMP. Broad cellular metabolic reprogramming and inflammation ensue
initially as an adaptive response to a stressor but become persistent due to the further
generation of signals. Symptoms manifest due to a combination of metabolic and inflamma-
tory/immune responses affecting neuronal and musculoskeletal tissues and the persistence
of an adaptive response. Secondary effects of dysregulation can occur in other tissues,
accounting for associated symptoms in ME/CFS and observations of irregularities in the
metabolites of some ME/CFS samples.
4.3. Possible Clinical Manifestations
Under this hypothetical model, several deductions could be made if these mechanisms
are confirmed by experimental research. If confirmed, these findings would assist by
providing specific targets for therapy that could depend on the metabolic and immune
phenotype of the patient being treated. PEM in this model is likely to be the result of a
combination of factors, including dysregulated metabolism and impaired mitochondrial
function in select tissues, and an exaggerated adaptive response to stressors. Unrefreshing
sleep can also be explained by dysregulated metabolism and neuroinflammation, which
can lead to a vicious cycle of not getting enough restful sleep and this causing worsening
symptoms due to the addition of a new stressor. Muscle/joint pain is likely to be the result
of dysregulated metabolism and aberrant increases in lactic acid generation due to the
shunting of metabolites away from more energetically favored and oxygen-dependent
pathways. Headaches and dizziness could also be the result of neuroinflammation and
dysregulated metabolism. These effects must be further investigated in the literature, as
noted above, before any definitive conclusions can be made.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
26 of 45
4.4. Model Limitations
While this model represents a possible means by which an ME/CFS phenotype could
emerge upon LDIR exposure, it remains largely hypothetical at present due to a lack of
replicated, high-quality data in the literature. There are, therefore, considerable limitations
with this model in its current state. As previously discussed, this model should not be
perceived as comprehensive and should be viewed as complementary to existing infectious,
autoimmune, and neuroinflammatory models. This model also does not explain or expand
on differences in signaling between cells and tissues, as this is still under active investigation
in ME/CFS research [116,120,135]. Further, this model does not address the mechanisms
by which genetic background can influence disease severity for the same reasons [161,313].
For example, it is evident from the literature that RIBEs are highly variable, depending on
factors such as cell type radiosensitivity and genetic background [272,350,368]. Further, the
identification of appropriate cohorts of ME/CFS patients may be problematic, as previ-
ously discussed, because of inconsistent screening criteria and the lack of an established
biomarker (or set of biomarkers) that may be used to segregate patient groups based on
potential molecular subtypes [7,13,160].
The major limitations in identifying targets for future investigation include the lack of
high-quality, clinical research that would better inform this model with respect to potential
targets and mechanisms. The identified candidates for further research have not been
tested extensively in the context of ME/CFS and by multiple research groups. ORNT1
dysfunction and SLC25A15 sequence variants have been directly identified in ME/CFS
patient samples [161,162], but these findings must be repeated and confirmed by additional
studies. Currently, ORNT1 is suspected to be involved in ME/CFS primarily based on the
presence of sequence variants in ME/CFS patients, as well as potential mechanistic connec-
tions to mitochondrial function and energy metabolism. ORNT1 does not appear in current
RIBE or LDIR research but has been interrogated under higher doses and is embedded in
well-characterized RIBE signaling pathways [92,153,168,189,194,267]. CD38 overexpression
has been directly observed in NK cells from ME/CFS patients [135,213], but these findings
must be repeated and confirmed by additional groups before any consensus is achieved.
The results from these papers and other studies indicate possible aberrant calcium signal-
ing in ME/CFS. CD38 is suspected primarily due to the finding of overexpression and
aberrant function in ME/CFS PBMCs and possible mechanistic links to downstream cy-
tokine release and immune function [56,121,135,213,216]. CD38 has not been identified in
RIBE or LDIR research; however, a mechanistic link is suspected due to its role mediating
calcium fluxes that have been well characterized in RIBEs [195,196,208,218,220]. Cyclin
D1 dysfunction and mutations have not been identified in the current ME/CFS literature.
The suspected altered function in some cells and tissues primarily stems from potential
mechanistic links to immune function [232,242,245,359], oxidative stress responses [243],
and inflammatory responses [235,245,360], which may be mediated by cyclin D1 in relevant
pathways involving the cell cycle [360,369], the modulation of cellular metabolism [244,245],
mitogenic pathways [236], and cell differentiation [232,258,370]. Pathways involving cy-
clin D1 and cell-cycle checkpoints are suspected in ME/CFS based on mechanistic links;
however, no ME/CFS study has explicitly examined cyclin D1 as of today. Therefore,
much additional research is required to support the hypothesis that aberrant cyclin D1
activity contributes to ME/CFS. Cyclin D1 has been implicated in RIBE cell-cycle check-
point effects in vitro [229,258,259,369]. Alpha-synuclein dysfunction and mutations have
not been identified in ME/CFS in any large-scale study. The suspected involvement in
ME/CFS relies partly on a case report of an autopsy of a patient previously diagnosed
with ME/CFS [292] and more strongly by its mechanistic links to mitochondrial func-
tion [284–286,349], deleterious activity under oxidative stress [281,286,349], and a potential
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
27 of 45
role in neuroinflammation [275,288,290,293] as well as its potential role as a DAMP in other
diseases [275,291,300,303]. Alpha-synuclein has not yet been identified in LDIR or RIBE
research. We have provided a qualitative summary of the available research in Table 1.
Table 1. A qualitative summary of the quality of the available literature on the various putative
biomarkers covered in this review. Categories include the availability of direct ME/CFS research
in vitro, clinical ME/CFS studies, RIBE research in vitro, and RIBE research in vivo (mostly animal
models). Scores represent a qualitative measure of data availability: o = very few articles in the
literature; x = some limited evidence in the literature with several articles; xx = considerable evidence
in the literature with many studies but no broad consensus; and xxx = overwhelming evidence in the
literature and established (or burgeoning) acceptance.
ME/CFS; In Vitro
ME/CFS;
Clinical
RIBE; In Vitro
RIBE; In Vivo
Mitochondria
xx
xx
xxx
xxx
ORNT1
o
x
o
o
CD38
x
xx
o
o
Cyclin D1
o
o
xxx
xx
Alpha-syn
o
o
o
o
Overall, there is great uncertainty concerning whether the possible biomarkers covered
in this review are directly implicated in ME/CFS and RIBEs because these candidate
biomarkers have not been extensively researched in the context of ME/CFS and RIBEs
separately. Nevertheless, it appears likely, given the evidence from the literature covered in
this review, that a broader examination of the cellular and extracellular processes mediated
by these proteins would be fruitful in understanding the etiology of ME/CFS and possibly
demonstrate overlap or differences with LDIR responses (such as RIBEs). To address these
limitations, the scope of biomarkers covered in this review should be expanded in future
research, and high-throughput approaches may be necessary to collect high-quality data
from patient cohorts. Pertinent cell signaling pathways (e.g., mitogenic, pro-inflammatory,
etc.) and key components in these pathways should be examined closely in future studies,
and variance in expression/function between different tissues (e.g., PBMCs vs. skeletal
muscle vs. CSF) would also have to be undertaken to obtain a more complete picture of the
pathophysiological processes underpinning the disease.
Finally, the model does not directly address the complexities and nuances of immune
responses in ME/CFS, pro-inflammatory cytokine signaling, and low-grade inflammation.
Researchers are actively investigating the possibility of using anti-cytokine therapy in
ME/CFS in limited trials, yet these therapeutics are under active investigation and have
not been approved for broader use [371–376]. Nevertheless, many cytokine pathways are
currently under investigation for potential targets. For example, some researchers have
investigated the JAK/STAT signaling pathway and are testing JAK inhibitors [375–377].
The inhibition of JAK in lymphocytes prevents cytokine (such as interferons, interleukins,
etc.) signal transduction, which suppresses pro-inflammatory signaling. Currently, the
results from these studies have not yielded consistent and widespread symptom remission
across patient cohorts but are still ongoing.
5. Conclusions
In summary, the convergence of recent evidence from studies encompassing LDIR
biology and ME/CFS biomarkers points to LDIR as a plausible, yet still greatly underex-
plored, stressor that could potentially initiate or amplify the pathogenic cascade underlying
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
28 of 45
ME/CFS. The reviewed biomarkers, including mitochondrial respiratory impairment,
CD38-driven NAD+ depletion, cyclin D1-mediated metabolic reprogramming, and α-
synuclein–induced neuroinflammation, highlight common pathways where environmental
conditions might intersect with individual susceptibility to produce the heterogeneous
clinical spectrum of chronic fatigue and associated symptoms within the context of LDIR
exposure. As reviewed, while these pathways are suspected to be potentially involved in
ME/CFS, there is currently little to no direct experimental or clinical evidence that links
LIDR exposure to ME/CFS pathogenesis. Future investigations should prioritize large,
high-quality cohorts and combine rigorous diagnostic criteria with standardized multi-
omics profiling, exosome analysis, and functional mitochondrial assays in order to confirm
the largely unexplored and otherwise tenuous links reviewed in this report. We hope
that future research will facilitate the identification and testing of targeted interventions,
possibly including but not limited to CD38 inhibition and NAD+ supplementation, to first
determine applicability and eventually manage or even treat ME/CFS once suitable targets
have been identified. By integrating these approaches, we can potentially promote the
elucidation of mechanisms underlying ME/CFS in at least a subgroup of patients whose
disease can be linked to LDIR exposure and related biological effects.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: A.R., A.C. and C.M.; investigation and literature review:
A.R., A.C. and C.M.; software and visualization: A.R.; original draft preparation: A.R., A.C. and C.M.;
writing review and editing: A.R., A.C. and C.M.; supervision: C.M.; project administration: A.C. and
C.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Conflicts of Interest: Author Alan Cocchetto was employed by the company National CFIDS
Foundation Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
ME/CFS
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
CFIDS
Chronic Fatigue and Immune Dysfunction Syndrome
CCC
Canadian Consensus Criteria
LDIR
low-dose ionizing radiation
RIBE
radiation-induced bystander effect
IOM
Institute of Medicine Criteria
PEM
post-exertional malaise
ICF
idiopathic chronic fatigue
PAIS
Post-Acute Infection Syndrome
PRS
Post-Radiation Syndrome
LNT
Linear no-threshold (model)
mSv
millisievert
EBRT
external beam radiation therapy
OXPHOS
oxidative phosphorylation
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
29 of 45
PBMC
peripheral blood mononuclear cell
TCA
tricarboxylic acid
PCS
Post-COVID Syndrome
mtDNA
mitochondrial DNA
ICCM
irradiated cell-conditioned medium
HHH
hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria
ASS
arginosuccinate synthetase
ASL
arginosuccinate lysase
TRPM2
transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 2
ADPR
ADP-ribosylation
PD
Parkinson’s Disease
Gy
Gray (J/kg)
References
1.
Brurberg, K.G.; Fønhus, M.S.; Larun, L.; Flottorp, S.; Malterud, K. Case definitions for chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic
encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME): A systematic review. BMJ Open 2014, 4, e003973. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Fan, J.; Jiao, J.; Chang, H.-Q.; Zhong, D.-L.; Liu, X.-B.; Li, J.; Chen, L.-M.; Jin, R.-J.; Wu, X. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): Diagnosis and management. J. Transl. Med. 2025, 24, 62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Lim, E.-J.; Ahn, Y.-C.; Jang, E.-S.; Lee, S.-W.; Lee, S.-H.; Son, C.-G. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME). J. Transl. Med. 2020, 18, 100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Bansal, A.S. Investigating unexplained fatigue in general practice with a particular focus on CFS/ME. BMC Fam. Pract. 2016,
17, 81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Deumer, U.-S.; Varesi, A.; Floris, V.; Savioli, G.; Mantovani, E.; López-Carrasco, P.; Rosati, G.M.; Prasad, S.; Ricevuti, G. Myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): An overview. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10, 4786. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Geraghty, K.J.; Adeniji, C. The importance of accurate diagnosis of ME/CFS in children and adolescents: A commentary. Front.
Pediatr. 2019, 6, 435. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Jason, L.A.; Johnson, M. Solving the ME/CFS criteria and name conundrum: The aftermath of IOM. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav.
2020, 8, 97–107. [CrossRef]
8.
Conroy, K.E.; Islam, M.F.; Jason, L.A. Evaluating case diagnostic criteria for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS): Toward an empirical case definition. Disabil. Rehabil. 2023, 45, 840–847. [PubMed]
9.
Lim, E.-J.; Son, C.-G. Review of case definitions for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). J. Transl.
Med. 2020, 18, 289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Bar-Tana, J. mTORC1 syndrome (TorS): Unifying paradigm for PASC, ME/CFS and PAIS. J. Transl. Med. 2025, 23, 297. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
11.
Trautmann, A. Core features and inherent diversity of post-acute infection syndromes. Front. Immunol. 2025, 16, 1509131.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Nuzzo, J.L.; Taylor, J.L.; Latella, C. Muscle strength, muscle endurance, voluntary activation, and perception of effort in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): An overview. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2026, 14, 42–60. [CrossRef]
13.
Jonsjö, M.A.; Wicksell, R.K.; Holmström, L.; Andreasson, A.; Bileviciute-Ljungar, I.; Olsson, G.L. Identifying symptom subgroups
in patients with ME/CFS–relationships to functioning and quality of life. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2017, 5, 33–42. [CrossRef]
14.
Stoothoff, J.; Gleason, K.; McManimen, S.; Thorpe, T.; Jason, L.A. Subtyping patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) and
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) by course of illness. J. Biosens. Biomark. Diagn. 2017, 2, 10–15226. [CrossRef]
15.
Murga, I.; Aranburu, L.; Gargiulo, P.A.; Esteban, J.C.G.; Lafuente, J.-V. Clinical heterogeneity in ME/CFS. A way to understand
long-COVID19 fatigue. Front. Psychiatry 2021, 12, 735784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Collin, S.M.; Heron, J.; Nikolaus, S.; Knoop, H.; Crawley, E. Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS/ME) symptom-based phenotypes
and 1-year treatment outcomes in two clinical cohorts of adult patients in the UK and The Netherlands. J. Psychosom. Res. 2018,
104, 29–34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Hardcastle, S.; Brenu, E.; Johnston, S.; Nguyen, T.; Huth, T.; Baljit Singh, M.K.; Ramos, S.; Ariana, A.; Staines, D.; Marshall-
Gradisnik, S. Analysis of the relationship between immune dysfunction and symptom severity in patients with Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME). J. Clin. Cell. Immunol. 2014, 5, 1000190–1000191.
18.
Castro-Marrero, J.; Faro, M.; Aliste, L.; Sáez-Francàs, N.; Calvo, N.; Martínez-Martínez, A.; de Sevilla, T.F.; Alegre, J. Comorbidity
in chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: A nationwide population-based cohort study. Psychosomatics 2017, 58,
533–543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
30 of 45
19.
Asprusten, T.T.; Sletner, L.; Wyller, V.B.B. Are there subgroups of chronic fatigue syndrome? An exploratory cluster analysis of
biological markers. J. Transl. Med. 2021, 19, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Maya, J. Surveying the metabolic and dysfunctional profiles of T cells and NK cells in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 11937. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Germain, A.; Giloteaux, L.; Moore, G.E.; Levine, S.M.; Chia, J.K.; Keller, B.A.; Stevens, J.; Franconi, C.J.; Mao, X.; Shungu, D.C.; et al.
Plasma metabolomics reveals disrupted response and recovery following maximal exercise in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome. J. Clin. Investig. 2022, 7, e157621. [CrossRef]
22.
Komaroff, A.L.; Lipkin, W.I. ME/CFS and Long COVID share similar symptoms and biological abnormalities: Road map to the
literature. Front. Med. 2023, 10, 1187163. [CrossRef]
23.
Glass, K.A.; Germain, A.; Huang, Y.V.; Hanson, M.R. Urine metabolomics exposes anomalous recovery after maximal exertion in
female ME/CFS patients. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 3685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Baraniuk, J.N. Exertional Exhaustion (Post-Exertional Malaise, PEM) Evaluated by the Effects of Exercise on Cerebrospinal Fluid
Metabolomics–Lipidomics and Serine Pathway in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025,
26, 1282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Van Campenhout, J.; Buntinx, Y.; Xiong, H.-Y.; Wyns, A.; Polli, A.; Nijs, J.; Aerts, J.L.; Laeremans, T.; Hendrix, J. Unravelling
the Connection Between Energy Metabolism and Immune Senescence/Exhaustion in Patients with Myalgic Encephalomyeli-
tis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Biomolecules 2025, 15, 357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Hwang, J.-H.; Lee, J.-S.; Oh, H.-M.; Lee, E.-J.; Lim, E.-J.; Son, C.-G. Evaluation of viral infection as an etiology of ME/CFS: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Transl. Med. 2023, 21, 763. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Hanson, M.R. The viral origin of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS Pathog. 2023, 19, e1011523.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Shankar, V.; Wilhelmy, J.; Curtis, E.J.; Michael, B.; Cervantes, L.; Mallajosyula, V.; Davis, R.W.; Snyder, M.; Younis, S.; Robinson,
W.H.; et al. Oxidative stress is a shared characteristic of ME/CFS and Long COVID. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2025, 122,
e2426564122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Wong, T.L.; Weitzer, D.J. Long COVID and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)—A systemic review
and comparison of clinical presentation and symptomatology. Medicina 2021, 57, 418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Jason, L.A.; Katz, B.Z. Predisposing and Precipitating Factors in Epstein–Barr Virus-Caused Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome. Microorganisms 2025, 13, 702. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Kerr, J. Early growth response gene upregulation in Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV)-associated myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Rasa, S.; Nora-Krukle, Z.; Henning, N.; Eliassen, E.; Shikova, E.; Harrer, T.; Scheibenbogen, C.; Murovska, M.; Prusty, B.K.;
European Network on ME/CFS (EUROMENE). Chronic viral infections in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS). J. Transl. Med. 2018, 16, 268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Poomkudy, J.T.; Torres, C.; Jason, L.A.; Fishbein, J.; Katz, B.Z. Joint flexibility and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome after mononucleosis. Clin. Ther. 2024, 46, 285–288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Pricoco, R.; Meidel, P.; Hofberger, T.; Zietemann, H.; Mueller, Y.; Wiehler, K.; Michel, K.; Paulick, J.; Leone, A.; Haegele, M.
One-year follow-up of young people with ME/CFS following infectious mononucleosis by Epstein-Barr virus. Front. Pediatr.
2024, 11, 1266738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Jason, L.A.; Cotler, J.; Islam, M.F.; Furst, J.; Katz, B.Z. Predictors for developing severe myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome following infectious mononucleosis. J. Rehabil. Ther. 2022, 4, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Jason, L.A.; Cotler, J.; Islam, M.F.; Sunnquist, M.; Katz, B.Z. Risks for developing myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome in college students following infectious mononucleosis: A prospective cohort study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2021, 73,
e3740–e3746. [PubMed]
37.
O’Sullivan, O. Long-term sequelae following previous coronavirus epidemics. Clin. Med. 2021, 21, e68–e70. [CrossRef]
38.
Blomberg, J.; Rizwan, M.; Böhlin-Wiener, A.; Elfaitouri, A.; Julin, P.; Zachrisson, O.; Rosén, A.; Gottfries, C.-G. Antibodies to
human herpesviruses in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Front. Immunol. 2019, 10, 1946. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
39.
Magnus, P.; Gunnes, N.; Tveito, K.; Bakken, I.J.; Ghaderi, S.; Stoltenberg, C.; Hornig, M.; Lipkin, W.I.; Trogstad, L.; Håberg, S.E.
Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) is associated with pandemic influenza infection, but not with
an adjuvanted pandemic influenza vaccine. Vaccine 2015, 33, 6173–6177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Poenaru, S.; Abdallah, S.J.; Corrales-Medina, V.; Cowan, J. COVID-19 and post-infectious myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome: A narrative review. Ther. Adv. Infect. Dis. 2021, 8, 20499361211009384. [CrossRef]
41.
Guo, C.; Che, X.; Briese, T.; Ranjan, A.; Allicock, O.; Yates, R.A.; Cheng, A.; March, D.; Hornig, M.; Komaroff, A.L.; et al. Deficient
butyrate-producing capacity in the gut microbiome is associated with bacterial network disturbances and fatigue symptoms in
ME/CFS. Cell Host Microbe 2023, 31, 288–304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
31 of 45
42.
König, R.S.; Albrich, W.C.; Kahlert, C.R.; Bahr, L.S.; Löber, U.; Vernazza, P.; Scheibenbogen, C.; Forslund, S.K. The gut microbiome
in myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Front. Immunol. 2022, 12, 628741, Erratum in Front
Immunol. 2022, 13, 878196. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.878196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Martín, F.; Blanco-Suárez, M.; Zambrano, P.; Cáceres, O.; Almirall, M.; Alegre-Martín, J.; Lobo, B.; González-Castro, A.M.; Santos,
J.; Domingo, J.C.; et al. Increased gut permeability and bacterial translocation are associated with fibromyalgia and myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: Implications for disease-related biomarker discovery. Front. Immunol. 2023,
14, 1253121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Lattie, E.G.; Antoni, M.H.; Fletcher, M.A.; Czaja, S.; Perdomo, D.; Sala, A.; Nair, S.; Fu, S.H.; Penedo, F.J.; Klimas, N. Beyond
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) symptom severity: Stress management skills are related to
lower illness burden. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2013, 1, 210–222. [CrossRef]
45.
Maes, M.; Twisk, F.N.M. Chronic fatigue syndrome: Harvey and Wessely’s (bio) psychosocial model versus a bio (psychosocial)
model based on inflammatory and oxidative and nitrosative stress pathways. BMC Med. 2010, 8, 35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Sirotiak, Z.; Thomas, E.B.K. Beyond fatigue: An intersectional analysis of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS) and social identities. Curr. Psychol. 2025, 44, 17694–17706. [CrossRef]
47.
Tsai, S.-Y.; Lin, C.-L.; Shih, S.-C.; Hsu, C.-W.; Leong, K.-H.; Kuo, C.-F.; Lio, C.-F.; Chen, Y.-T.; Hung, Y.-J.; Shi, L. Increased risk of
chronic fatigue syndrome following burn injuries. J. Transl. Med. 2018, 16, 342. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Kell, D.B.; Pretorius, E. The potential role of ischaemia–reperfusion injury in chronic, relapsing diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis, Long COVID, and ME/CFS: Evidence, mechanisms, and therapeutic implications. Biochem. J. 2022, 479, 1653–1708.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Slack, E.; Pears, K.A.; Rankin, J.; Newton, J.L.; Pearce, M. Identifying, synthesising and appraising existing evidence relating
to myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and pregnancy: A mixed-methods systematic review. BMJ Open 2023,
13, e070366. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Thrasher, J.D.; Prokop, C.; Roberts, C.; Hooper, D. A family with ME/CFS following exposure to molds, mycotoxins and bacteria
in a water-damaged home: A case report. Int. J. 2016, 4, 15.
51.
Wu, T.Y.; Khorramshahi, T.; Taylor, L.A.; Bansal, N.S.; Rodriguez, B.; Rey, I.R. Prevalence of Aspergillus-derived mycotoxins
(ochratoxin, aflatoxin, and gliotoxin) and their distribution in the urinalysis of ME/CFS patients. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
2022, 19, 2052. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Tuuminen, T.; Jääskeläinen, T.; Vaali, K.; Polo, O. Dampness and mold hypersensitivity syndrome and vaccination as risk factors
for chronic fatigue syndrome. Autoimmune Rev. 2019, 18, 107–108. [CrossRef]
53.
Sotzny, F.; Blanco, J.; Capelli, E.; Castro-Marrero, J.; Steiner, S.; Murovska, M.; Scheibenbogen, C. Myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome–evidence for an autoimmune disease. Autoimmun. Rev. 2018, 17, 601–609. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Itoh, Y.; Fukunaga, Y.; Igarashi, T.; Imai, T.; Yoshida, J.; Tsuchiya, M.; Fujino, O.; Murakami, M.; Yamamoto, M. Autoimmunity in
chronic fatigue syndrome in children. Jpn. J. Rheumatol. 1998, 8, 429–437. [CrossRef]
55.
Blomberg, J.; Gottfries, C.-G.; Elfaitouri, A.; Rizwan, M.; Rosén, A. Infection elicited autoimmunity and myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome: An explanatory model. Front. Immunol. 2018, 9, 229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Lee, J.-S.; Lacerda, E.; Kingdon, C.; Abken, E.; Susannini, G.; Dockrell, H.M.; Nacul, L.; Cliff, J.M. Abnormal T-Cell Activation
And Cytotoxic T-Cell Frequency Discriminates Symptom Severity In Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.
medRxiv 2025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Georgopoulos, A.P.; James, L.M.; Peterson, P.K. HLA and pathogens in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS) and other post-infection conditions. Sci. Rep. 2025, 15, 37303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Sato, W.; Ono, H.; Matsutani, T.; Nakamura, M.; Shin, I.; Amano, K.; Suzuki, R.; Yamamura, T. Skewing of the B cell receptor
repertoire in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav. Immun. 2021, 95, 245–255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Glassford, J.A.G. The neuroinflammatory etiopathology of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).
Front. Physiol. 2017, 8, 88. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Tate, W.; Walker, M.; Sweetman, E.; Helliwell, A.; Peppercorn, K.; Edgar, C.; Blair, A.; Chatterjee, A. Molecular mechanisms
of neuroinflammation in ME/CFS and long COVID to sustain disease and promote relapses. Front. Neurol. 2022, 13, 877772.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Lee, J.-S.; Sato, W.; Son, C.-G. Brain-regional characteristics and neuroinflammation in ME/CFS patients from neuroimaging: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Autoimmun. Rev. 2024, 23, 103484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Loganovsky, K.N. Chronic fatigue syndrome in the Chernobyl accident consequences liquidators. Int. J. Radiat. Med. 2001, 3, 76.
63.
Loganovsky, K.N. Vegetative-vascular dystonia and osteoalgetic syndrome or Chronic Fatigue Syndrome as a characteristic
after-effect of radioecological disaster: The Chernobyl accident experience. J. Chronic Fatigue Syndr. 2000, 7, 3–16. [CrossRef]
64.
Mitsutake, N.; Fukushima, T.; Matsuse, M.; Rogounovitch, T.; Saenko, V.; Uchino, S.; Ito, M.; Suzuki, K.; Suzuki, S.; Yamashita, S.
BRAF V600E mutation is highly prevalent in thyroid carcinomas in the young population in Fukushima: A different oncogenic
profile from Chernobyl. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 16976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
32 of 45
65.
Suzuki, S.; Suzuki, S.; Fukushima, T.; Midorikawa, S.; Shimura, H.; Matsuzuka, T.; Ishikawa, T.; Takahashi, H.; Ohtsuru, A.; Sakai,
A. Comprehensive survey results of childhood thyroid ultrasound examinations in Fukushima in the first four years after the
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident. Thyroid 2016, 26, 843–851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Tokonami, S.; Hosoda, M.; Akiba, S.; Sorimachi, A.; Kashiwakura, I.; Balonov, M. Thyroid doses for evacuees from the Fukushima
nuclear accident. Sci. Rep. 2012, 2, 507. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Von Hippel, F.N. The radiological and psychological consequences of the Fukushima Daiichi accident. Bull. At. Sci. 2011, 67,
27–36. [CrossRef]
68.
Zakaib, G.D. Radiation risks unknown: Scientists struggle to calculate long-term effects of low-dose exposures in Fukushima.
Nature 2011, 471, 419–420. [CrossRef]
69.
Hasegawa, A.; Ohira, T.; Maeda, M.; Yasumura, S.; Tanigawa, K. Emergency responses and health consequences after the
Fukushima accident; evacuation and relocation. Clin. Oncol. 2016, 28, 237–244. [CrossRef]
70.
Marcoux, S. Contamination and a compact: Remediless environmental harm in the Marshall Islands. Environ. Claims J. 2022, 34,
95–135.
71.
Imanaka, T.; Endo, S.; Kawano, N.; Tanaka, K. Radiation exposure and disease questionnaires of early entrants after the Hiroshima
bombing. Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 2012, 149, 91–96.
72.
Kim, Y.; Tsutsumi, A.; Izutsu, T.; Kawamura, N.; Miyazaki, T.; Kikkawa, T. Persistent distress after psychological exposure to the
Nagasaki atomic bomb explosion. Br. J. Psychiatry 2011, 199, 411–416. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Yamada, M.; Izumi, S. Psychiatric sequelae in atomic bomb survivors in Hiroshima and Nagasaki two decades after the explosions.
Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol. 2002, 37, 409–415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Hunter, C.G. Radiation injuries in atomic warfare with stress on fallout. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 1957, 76, 394. [PubMed]
75.
Mothersill, C.; Rusin, A.; Seymour, C. Low doses and non-targeted effects in environmental radiation protection; where are we
now and where should we go? Environ. Res. 2017, 159, 484–490. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Mitchel, R.E.J. Cancer and low dose responses in vivo: Implications for radiation protection. Dose-Response 2007, 5, 284–291.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Little, M.P. Do non-targeted effects increase or decrease low dose risk in relation to the linear-non-threshold (LNT) model? Mutat.
Res./Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 2010, 687, 17–27. [CrossRef]
78.
Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Development of Low Radiation Dose Biomarkers: A Commentary on Whether Non-targeted Effects
Need to Be Considered. Radiat. Res. 2025, 204, 517–528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Wilson, C.; Adams, G.G.; Patel, P.; Windham, K.; Ennis, C.; Caffrey, E. A review of recent low-dose research and recommendations
for moving forward. Health Phys. 2024, 126, 386–396. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Cuttler, J.M. The LNT issue is about politics and economics, not safety. Dose-Response 2020, 18, 1559325820949066. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
81.
Averbeck, D. Does scientific evidence support a change from the LNT model for low-dose radiation risk extrapolation? Health
Phys. 2009, 97, 493–504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Mothersill, C.; Rusin, A.; Seymour, C. Towards a new concept of low dose. Health Phys. 2019, 117, 330–336. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Implications for human and environmental health of low doses of ionising radiation. J. Environ.
Radioact. 2014, 133, 5–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Adam-Guillermin, C.; Hertal-Aas, T.; Oughton, D.; Blanchard, L.; Alonzo, F.; Armant, O.; Horemans, N. Radiosensitivity and
transgenerational effects in non-human species. Ann. ICRP 2018, 47, 327–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Ryabokon, N.I.; Goncharova, R.I. Transgenerational accumulation of radiation damage in small mammals chronically exposed to
Chernobyl fallout. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 2006, 45, 167–177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Mladenov, E.; Li, F.; Zhang, L.; Klammer, H.; Iliakis, G. Intercellular communication of DNA damage and oxidative status
underpin bystander effects. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2018, 94, 719–726. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Havaki, S.; Kotsinas, A.; Chronopoulos, E.; Kletsas, D.; Georgakilas, A.; Gorgoulis, V.G. The role of oxidative DNA damage in
radiation induced bystander effect. Cancer Lett. 2015, 356, 43–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Tamminga, J.; Kovalchuk, O. Role of DNA damage and epigenetic DNA methylation changes in radiation-induced genomic
instability and bystander effects in germline in vivo. Curr. Mol. Pharmacol. 2011, 4, 115–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Lyng, F.M.; Howe, O.L.; McClean, B. Reactive oxygen species-induced release of signalling factors in irradiated cells triggers
membrane signalling and calcium influx in bystander cells. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2011, 87, 683–695. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Vines, A.M.; Lyng, F.M.; McClean, B.; Seymour, C.; Mothersill, C.E. Bystander signal production and response are independent
processes which are cell line dependent. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2008, 84, 83–90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Pasi, F.; Facoetti, A.; Nano, R. IL-8 and IL-6 bystander signalling in human glioblastoma cells exposed to gamma radiation.
Anticancer Res. 2010, 30, 2769–2772. [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
33 of 45
92.
Chen, S.; Zhao, Y.; Han, W.; Zhao, G.; Zhu, L.; Wang, J.; Bao, L.; Jiang, E.; Xu, A.; Hei, T.K.; et al. Mitochondria-dependent
signalling pathway are involved in the early process of radiation-induced bystander effects. Br. J. Cancer 2008, 98, 1839. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
93.
Azzam, E.I.; De Toledo, S.M.; Little, J.B. Oxidative metabolism, gap junctions and the ionizing radiation-induced bystander effect.
Oncogene 2003, 22, 7050–7057. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Azzam, E.I.; De Toledo, S.M.; Spitz, D.R.; Little, J.B. Oxidative metabolism modulates signal transduction and micronucleus
formation in bystander cells from α-particle-irradiated normal human fibroblast cultures. Cancer Res. 2002, 62, 5436–5442.
[PubMed]
95.
Gonon, G.; de Toledo, S.M.; Perumal, V.; Jay-Gerin, J.-P.; Azzam, E.I. Impact of the redox environment on propagation of radiation
bystander effects: The modulating effect of oxidative metabolism and oxygen partial pressure. Mutat. Res./Genet. Toxicol. Environ.
Mutagen. 2022, 883, 503559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Mariotti, L.G.; Bertolotti, A.; Ranza, E.; Babini, G.; Ottolenghi, A. Investigation of the mechanisms underpinning IL-6 cytokine
release in bystander responses: The roles of radiation dose, radiation quality and specific ROS/RNS scavengers. Int. J. Radiat.
Biol. 2012, 88, 751–762. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Shao, C.; Stewart, V.; Folkard, M.; Michael, B.D.; Prise, K.M. Nitric oxide-mediated signaling in the bystander response of
individually targeted glioma cells. Cancer Res. 2003, 63, 8437–8442. [PubMed]
98.
Jella, K.K.; Moriarty, R.; McClean, B.; Byrne, H.J.; Lyng, F.M. Reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide signaling in bystander cells.
PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0195371. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Klammer, H.; Mladenov, E.; Li, F.; Iliakis, G. Bystander effects as manifestation of intercellular communication of DNA damage
and of the cellular oxidative status. Cancer Lett. 2015, 356, 58–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Old data—New concepts: Integrating “indirect effects” into radiation protection. Health Phys. 2018,
115, 170–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Radiation hormesis and dose response: Are our current concepts meaningful or useful? Curr. Opin.
Toxicol. 2022, 30, 100335. [CrossRef]
102. Belyakov, O.V.; Folkard, M.; Prise, K.M.; Michael, B.D.; Mothersill, C. Non-targeted effects of radiation: Applications for
radiation protection and contribution to LNT discussion. In Proceedings of the European IRPA Congress 2002, Florence, Italy,
8–11 October 2002.
103. Loganovsky, K. Do low doses of ionizing radiation affect the human brain? Data Sci. J. 2009, 8, BR13–BR35. [CrossRef]
104. Tang, F.R.; Loganovsky, K. Low dose or low dose rate ionizing radiation-induced health effect in the human. J. Environ. Radioact.
2018, 192, 32–47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Loganovsky, K.; Perchuk, I.; Marazziti, D. Workers on transformation of the shelter object of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant
into an ecologically-safe system show qEEG abnormalities and cognitive dysfunctions: A follow-up study. World J. Biol. Psychiatry
2016, 17, 600–607. [PubMed]
106. Bazyka, D.; Loganovsky, K.; Ilyenko, I.; Volovyk, S.; Perchuk, I.; Pleskach, O.; Nechayev, S. Psychophysiological, neuroimmune
and gene expression changes in chronic fatigue syndrome after low-dose radiation exposure. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 2010, 77, 340.
[CrossRef]
107. Marozik, P.; Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C.B.; Mosse, I.; Melnov, S. Bystander effects induced by serum from survivors of the
Chernobyl accident. Exp. Hematol. 2007, 35, 55–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Cwykiel, J.; Kwiecien, G.J. Cellular therapies in post-radiation syndrome. In Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery: Experimental Models
and Research Designs; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014; pp. 629–636.
109. Chao, H.-H.; Doucette, A.; Raizen, D.M.; Vapiwala, N. Factors associated with fatigue in prostate cancer (PC) patients undergoing
external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 2018, 8, e139–e148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. McDonald, T.L.; Hung, A.Y.; Thomas, C.R.; Wood, L.J. Localized external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) to the pelvis induces
systemic IL-1Beta and TNF-alpha production: Role of the TNF-alpha signaling in EBRT-induced fatigue. Radiat. Res. 2016, 185,
4–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. LaRiviere, M.J.; Chao, H.-H.; Doucette, A.; Kegelman, T.P.; Taunk, N.K.; Freedman, G.M.; Vapiwala, N. Factors associated with
fatigue in patients with breast cancer undergoing external beam radiation therapy. Pract. Radiat. Oncol. 2020, 10, 409–422.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Smet, S.; Spampinato, S.; Pötter, R.; Jürgenliemk-Schulz, I.M.; Nout, R.A.; Chargari, C.; Mahantshetty, U.; Sturdza, A.; Segedin, B.;
Bruheim, K. Risk factors for late persistent fatigue after chemoradiotherapy in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer: An
analysis from the EMBRACE-I study. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2022, 112, 1177–1189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Ballesteros-Zebadua, P.; Chavarria, A.; Angel Celis, M.; Paz, C.; Franco-Perez, J. Radiation-induced neuroinflammation and
radiation somnolence syndrome. CNS Neurol. Disord.-Drug Targets Former. Curr. Drug Targets-CNS Neurol. Disord. 2012, 11,
937–949. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
34 of 45
114. Ryan, J. Radiation somnolence syndrome. J. Pediatr. Oncol. Nurs. 2000, 17, 50–53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Clarke, K.S.P.; Kingdon, C.C.; Hughes, M.P.; Lacerda, E.M.; Lewis, R.; Kruchek, E.J.; Dorey, R.A.; Labeed, F.H. The search
for a blood-based biomarker for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): From biochemistry to
electrophysiology. J. Transl. Med. 2025, 23, 149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Huang, K.; Lidbury, B.A.; Thomas, N.; Gooley, P.R.; Armstrong, C.W. Machine learning and multi-omics in precision medicine for
ME/CFS. J. Transl. Med. 2025, 23, 68. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Maksoud, R.; Magawa, C.; Eaton-Fitch, N.; Thapaliya, K.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. Biomarkers for myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): A systematic review. BMC Med. 2023, 21, 189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Che, X.; Ranjan, A.; Guo, C.; Zhang, K.; Goldsmith, R.; Levine, S.; Moneghetti, K.J.; Zhai, Y.; Ge, L.; Mishra, N. Heightened innate
immunity may trigger chronic inflammation, fatigue and post-exertional malaise in ME/CFS. npj Metab. Health Dis. 2025, 3, 34.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Morris, G.; Maes, M. Oxidative and nitrosative stress and immune-inflammatory pathways in patients with myalgic en-
cephalomyelitis (ME)/chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2014, 12, 168–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Heng, B.; Gunasegaran, B.; Krishnamurthy, S.; Bustamante, S.; Pires, A.S.; Chow, S.; Ahn, S.B.; Paul-Heng, M.; Maciver, Y.;
Smith, K. Mapping the complexity of ME/CFS: Evidence for abnormal energy metabolism, altered immune profile, and vascular
dysfunction. Cell Rep. Med. 2025, 6, 102514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Eaton-Fitch, N.; Rudd, P.; Er, T.; Hool, L.; Herrero, L.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. Immune exhaustion in ME/CFS and long COVID.
JCI Insight 2024, 9, e183810. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Mandarano, A.H.; Maya, J.; Giloteaux, L.; Peterson, D.L.; Maynard, M.; Gottschalk, C.G.; Hanson, M.R. Myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients exhibit altered T cell metabolism and cytokine associations. J. Clin. Investig. 2020, 130,
1491–1505. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Davis, L.; Higgs, M.; Snaith, A.; Lodge, T.A.; Strong, J.; Espejo-Oltra, J.A.; Kujawski, S.; Zalewski, P.; Pretorius, E.; Hoerger,
M. Dysregulation of lipid metabolism, energy production, and oxidative stress in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome, Gulf War Syndrome and fibromyalgia. Front. Neurosci. 2025, 19, 1498981. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Booth, N.E.; Myhill, S.; McLaren-Howard, J. Mitochondrial dysfunction and the pathophysiology of myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Int. J. Clin. Exp. Med. 2012, 5, 208. [PubMed]
125. Tomas, C.; Elson, J.L. The role of mitochondria in ME/CFS: A perspective. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2019, 7, 52–58. [CrossRef]
126. Chandel, N.S. Mitochondria. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2021, 13, a040543. [CrossRef]
127. McBride, H.M.; Neuspiel, M.; Wasiak, S. Mitochondria: More than just a powerhouse. Curr. Biol. 2006, 16, R551–R560. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
128. Myhill, S.; Booth, N.E.; McLaren-Howard, J. Chronic fatigue syndrome and mitochondrial dysfunction. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Med.
2009, 2, 1. [PubMed]
129. Morris, G.; Maes, M. Mitochondrial dysfunctions in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome explained by activated
immuno-inflammatory, oxidative and nitrosative stress pathways. Metab. Brain Dis. 2014, 29, 19–36. [PubMed]
130. Tomas, C.; Elson, J.L.; Strassheim, V.; Newton, J.L.; Walker, M. The effect of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
(ME/CFS) severity on cellular bioenergetic function. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0231136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Silvestre, I.B.; Dagda, R.Y.; Dagda, R.K.; Darley-Usmar, V. Mitochondrial alterations in NK lymphocytes from ME/CFS patients. J.
Immunol. 2019, 202, 126–139. [CrossRef]
132. Wood, E.; Hall, K.H.; Tate, W. Role of mitochondria, oxidative stress and the response to antioxidants in myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome: A possible approach to SARS-CoV-2 ‘long-haulers’? Chronic Dis. Transl. Med. 2020, 7, 14–26.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Fluge, Ø.; Mella, O.; Bruland, O.; Risa, K.; Dyrstad, S.E.; Alme, K.; Rekeland, I.G.; Sapkota, D.; Røsland, G.V.; Fosså, A. Metabolic
profiling indicates impaired pyruvate dehydrogenase function in myalgic encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight
2016, 1, e89376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Tomas, C.; Brown, A.; Strassheim, V.; Elson, J.; Newton, J.; Manning, P. Cellular bioenergetics is impaired in patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0186802, Correction in PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0192817. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0192817. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Armstrong, C.W.; Mensah, F.F.K.; Leandro, M.J.; Reddy, V.; Gooley, P.R.; Berkovitz, S.; Cambridge, G. In vitro B cell experiments
explore the role of CD24, CD38, and energy metabolism in ME/CFS. Front. Immunol. 2024, 14, 1178882. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Bizjak, D.A.; Ohmayer, B.; Buhl, J.L.; Schneider, E.M.; Walther, P.; Calzia, E.; Jerg, A.; Matits, L.; Steinacker, J.M. Functional and
morphological differences of muscle mitochondria in chronic fatigue syndrome and post-COVID syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024,
25, 1675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Scheibenbogen, C.; Wirth, K.J. Key pathophysiological role of skeletal muscle disturbance in post COVID and myalgic en-
cephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): Accumulated evidence. J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2025, 16, e13669.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
35 of 45
138. Missailidis, D.; Annesley, S.J.; Allan, C.Y.; Sanislav, O.; Lidbury, B.A.; Lewis, D.P.; Fisher, P.R. An isolated complex V inefficiency
and dysregulated mitochondrial function in immortalized lymphocytes from ME/CFS patients. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 1074.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Missailidis, D.; Sanislav, O.; Allan, C.Y.; Smith, P.K.; Annesley, S.J.; Fisher, P.R. Dysregulated provision of oxidisable substrates to
the mitochondria in ME/CFS lymphoblasts. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 2046. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Tsilioni, I.; Natelson, B.; Theoharides, T.C. Exosome-associated mitochondrial DNA from patients with myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome stimulates human microglia to release IL-1β. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2022, 56, 5784–5794. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
141. Naviaux, R.K.; Naviaux, J.C.; Li, K.; Bright, A.T.; Alaynick, W.A.; Wang, L.; Baxter, A.; Nathan, N.; Anderson, W.; Gordon, E.
Metabolic features of chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 1607571113, Correction in Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2017, 114, E3749. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1703858114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Tomas, C.; Newton, J. Metabolic abnormalities in chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: A mini-review. Biochem.
Soc. Trans. 2018, 46, 547–553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Armstrong, C.W.; McGregor, N.R.; Lewis, D.P.; Butt, H.L.; Gooley, P.R. Metabolic profiling reveals anomalous energy metabolism
and oxidative stress pathways in chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Metabolomics 2015, 11, 1626–1639. [CrossRef]
144. Li, G.-H.; Han, F.-F.; Kalafatis, E.; Kong, Q.-P.; Xiao, W. Systems Modeling Reveals Shared Metabolic Dysregulation and Potential
Treatments in ME/CFS and Long COVID. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025, 26, 6082. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Meyer, J.D.; Light, A.R.; Shukla, S.K.; Clevidence, D.; Yale, S.; Stegner, A.J.; Cook, D.B. Post-exertion malaise in chronic fatigue
syndrome: Symptoms and gene expression. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2013, 1, 190–209. [CrossRef]
146. Xu, S.; Wang, J.; Ding, N.; Hu, W.; Zhang, X.; Wang, B.; Hua, J.; Wei, W.; Zhu, Q. Exosome-mediated microRNA transfer plays a
role in radiation-induced bystander effect. RNA Biol. 2015, 12, 1355–1363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Ariyoshi, K.; Miura, T.; Kasai, K.; Fujishima, Y.; Nakata, A.; Yoshida, M. Radiation-Induced Bystander Effect is Mediated by
Mitochondrial DNA in Exosome-Like Vesicles. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 9103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Jella, K.K.; Rani, S.; O’Driscoll, L.; McClean, B.; Byrne, H.J.; Lyng, F.M. Exosomes are involved in mediating radiation induced
bystander signaling in human keratinocyte cells. Radiat. Res. 2014, 181, 138–145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Du, Y.; Du, S.; Liu, L.; Gan, F.; Jiang, X.; Wangrao, K.; Lyu, P.; Gong, P.; Yao, Y. Radiation-Induced Bystander Effect can be
Transmitted Through Exosomes Using miRNAs as Effector Molecules. Radiat. Res. 2020, 194, 89–100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Le, M.; Fernandez-Palomo, C.; McNeill, F.E.; Seymour, C.B.; Rainbow, A.J.; Mothersill, C.E. Exosomes are released by bystander
cells exposed to radiation-induced biophoton signals: Reconciling the mechanisms mediating the bystander effect. PLoS ONE
2017, 12, e0173685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Al-Mayah, A.H.J.; Irons, S.L.; Pink, R.C.; Carter, D.R.F.; Kadhim, M.A. Possible role of exosomes containing RNA in mediating
nontargeted effect of ionizing radiation. Radiat. Res. 2012, 177, 539–545. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Filler, K.; Lyon, D.; Bennett, J.; McCain, N.; Elswick, R.; Lukkahatai, N.; Saligan, L.N. Association of mitochondrial dysfunction
and fatigue: A review of the literature. BBA Clin. 2014, 1, 12–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Chen, S.; Zhao, Y.; Zhao, G.; Han, W.; Bao, L.; Yu, K.N.; Wu, L. Up-regulation of ROS by mitochondria-dependent bystander
signaling contributes to genotoxicity of bystander effects. Mutat. Res. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 2009, 666, 68–73. [CrossRef]
154. Nugent, S.; Mothersill, C.E.; Seymour, C.; McClean, B.; Lyng, F.M.; Murphy, J.E.J. Altered mitochondrial function and genome
frequency post exposure to gamma-radiation and bystander factors. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2010, 86, 829–841. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Yang, G.; Wu, L.; Chen, S.; Zhu, L.; Huang, P.; Tong, L.; Zhao, Y.; Zhao, G.; Wang, J.; Mei, T. Mitochondrial dysfunction resulting
from loss of cytochrome c impairs radiation-induced bystander effect. Br. J. Cancer 2009, 100, 1912. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Gorman, S.; Tosetto, M.; Lyng, F.; Howe, O.; Sheahan, K.; O’Donoghue, D.; Hyland, J.; Mulcahy, H.; O’Sullivan, J. Radiation and
chemotherapy bystander effects induce early genomic instability events: Telomere shortening and bridge formation coupled with
mitochondrial dysfunction. Mutat. Res. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 2009, 669, 131–138. [CrossRef]
157. Abou-Shanab, A.M.; Khedr, M.A.; Matosevic, S. The differential regulation of the urea cycle in tumors goes awry. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 2025, 242, 117365. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Matsumoto, S.; Häberle, J.; Kido, J.; Mitsubuchi, H.; Endo, F.; Nakamura, K. Urea cycle disorders—Update. J. Hum. Genet. 2019,
64, 833–847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Ah Mew, N.; Lichter-Konecki, U. Current Treatment Modalities for Urea Cycle Disorders: NA Mew et al. Pediatr. Drugs 2025, 27,
723–734. [CrossRef]
160. McGregor, N.R.; Armstrong, C.W.; Lewis, D.P.; Gooley, P.R. Post-exertional malaise is associated with hypermetabolism,
hypoacetylation and purine metabolism deregulation in ME/CFS cases. Diagnostics 2019, 9, 70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Dibble, J.J.; McGrath, S.J.; Ponting, C.P. Genetic risk factors of ME/CFS: A critical review. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2020, 29, R117–R124.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
36 of 45
162. Lacerda, E.M.; Mudie, K.; Kingdon, C.C.; Butterworth, J.D.; O’Boyle, S.; Nacul, L. The UK ME/CFS biobank: A disease-specific
biobank for advancing clinical research into myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Front. Neurol. 2018, 9, 1026.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Martinelli, D.; Diodato, D.; Ponzi, E.; Monné, M.; Boenzi, S.; Bertini, E.; Fiermonte, G.; Dionisi-Vici, C. The hyperornithinemia–
hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 2015, 10, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Al-Hassnan, Z.N.; Rashed, M.S.; Al-Dirbashi, O.Y.; Patay, Z.; Rahbeeni, Z.; Abu-Amero, K.K. Hyperornithinemia–
hyperammonemia–homocitrullinuria syndrome with stroke-like imaging presentation: Clinical, biochemical and molecular
analysis. J. Neurol. Sci. 2008, 264, 187–194. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Dionisi Vici, C.; Bachmann, C.; Gambarara, M.; Colombo, J.P.; Sabetta, G. Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria
syndrome: Low creatine excretion and effect of citrulline, arginine, or ornithine supplement. Pediatr. Res. 1987, 22, 364–367.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Viegas, C.M.; Tonin, A.M.; Zanatta, Â.; Seminotti, B.; Busanello, E.N.B.; Fernandes, C.G.; Moura, A.P.; Leipnitz, G.; Wajner, M.
Impairment of brain redox homeostasis caused by the major metabolites accumulating in hyperornithinemia–hyperammonemia–
homocitrullinuria syndrome in vivo. Metab. Brain Dis. 2012, 27, 521–530. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. Haust, M.D.; Dewar, R.A.; Gatfield, D.P.; Gordon, B.A. Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria (HHH)-
Syndrome: Ultrastructural Changes of Mitochondria in Cultured Dermal Fibroblasts of Three Patients. Pathol.-Res. Pract. 1996,
192, 271–280. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Korman, S.H.; Kanazawa, N.; Abu-Libdeh, B.; Gutman, A.; Tsujino, S. Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homoc-
itrullinuria syndrome with evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction due to a novel SLC25A15 (ORNT1) gene mutation in a
Palestinian family. J. Neurol. Sci. 2004, 218, 53–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
169. Viegas, C.M.; Busanello, E.N.B.; Tonin, A.M.; de Moura, A.P.; Grings, M.; Ritter, L.; Schuck, P.F.; da Costa Ferreira, G.; Sitta, A.;
Vargas, C.R. Dual mechanism of brain damage induced in vivo by the major metabolites accumulating in hyperornithinemia–
hyperammonemia–homocitrullinuria syndrome. Brain Res. 2011, 1369, 235–244. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Tessa, A.; Fiermonte, G.; Dionisi-Vici, C.; Paradies, E.; Baumgartner, M.R.; Chien, Y.; Loguercio, C.; de Baulny, H.O.; Nassogne, M.;
Schiff, M. Identification of novel mutations in the SLC25A15 gene in hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria
(HHH) syndrome: A clinical, molecular, and functional study. Hum. Mutat. 2009, 30, 741–748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
171. Silvera-Ruiz, S.M.; Gemperle, C.; Peano, N.; Olivero, V.; Becerra, A.; Häberle, J.; Gruppi, A.; Larovere, L.E.; Motrich, R.D. Immune
alterations in a patient with hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria syndrome: A case report. Front. Immunol.
2022, 13, 861516. [PubMed]
172. Husson, A.; Brasse-Lagnel, C.; Fairand, A.; Renouf, S.; Lavoinne, A. Argininosuccinate synthetase from the urea cycle to the
citrulline–NO cycle. Eur. J. Biochem. 2003, 270, 1887–1899. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Haines, R.J.; Pendleton, L.C.; Eichler, D.C. Argininosuccinate synthase: At the center of arginine metabolism. Int. J. Biochem. Mol.
Biol. 2010, 2, 8.
174. Erez, A.; Nagamani, S.C.S.; Lee, B. Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency—Argininosuccinic aciduria and beyond. Am. J. Med. Genet.
Part C Semin. Med. Genet. 2011, 157, 45–53. [CrossRef]
175. Nagamani, S.C.S.; Erez, A.; Lee, B. Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency. Genet. Med. 2012, 14, 501–507. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
176. Yang, M.; Soga, T.; Pollard, P.J.; Adam, J. The emerging role of fumarate as an oncometabolite. Front. Oncol. 2012, 2, 85. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
177. Schatton, D.; Fumarate, F.C. Fumarate. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2025, 36, 778–779. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
178. Chen, S.; Minegishi, Y.; Hasumura, T.; Shimotoyodome, A.; Ota, N. Involvement of ammonia metabolism in the improvement of
endurance performance by tea catechins in mice. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 6065. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Wilkinson, D.J.; Smeeton, N.J.; Watt, P.W. Ammonia metabolism, the brain and fatigue; revisiting the link. Prog. Neurobiol. 2010,
91, 200–219. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Baraniuk, J.N. Cerebrospinal fluid metabolomics, lipidomics and serine pathway dysfunction in myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndroome (ME/CFS). Sci. Rep. 2025, 15, 7381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
181. Graham, T.E. Exercise-induced hyperammonemia: Skeletal muscle ammonia metabolism and the peripheral and central effects.
In Hepatic Encephalopathy, Hyperammonemia, and Ammonia Toxicity; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 1994; Volume 368, pp. 181–195.
182. Taccori, A.; Maksoud, R.; Eaton-Fitch, N.; Patel, M.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. A systematic review and meta-analysis of urinary
biomarkers in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). J. Transl. Med. 2023, 21, 440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Kavyani, B.; Lidbury, B.A.; Schloeffel, R.; Fisher, P.R.; Missailidis, D.; Annesley, S.J.; Dehhaghi, M.; Heng, B.; Guillemin, G.J. Could
the kynurenine pathway be the key missing piece of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) complex
puzzle? Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2022, 79, 412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
184. Armstrong, C.W.; McGregor, N.R.; Sheedy, J.R.; Buttfield, I.; Butt, H.L.; Gooley, P.R. NMR metabolic profiling of serum identifies
amino acid disturbances in chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin. Chim. Acta 2012, 413, 1525–1531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
37 of 45
185. Murrough, J.W.; Mao, X.; Collins, K.A.; Kelly, C.; Andrade, G.; Nestadt, P.; Levine, S.M.; Mathew, S.J.; Shungu, D.C. Increased
ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome measured by 1H MRS imaging at 3.0 T. II: Comparison with major depressive
disorder. NMR Biomed. 2010, 23, 643–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Natelson, B.H.; Vu, D.; Coplan, J.D.; Mao, X.; Blate, M.; Kang, G.; Soto, E.; Kapusuz, T.; Shungu, D.C. Elevations of ventricular
lactate levels occur in both chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2017, 5, 15–20. [CrossRef]
187. Shungu, D.C.; Weiduschat, N.; Murrough, J.W.; Mao, X.; Pillemer, S.; Dyke, J.P.; Medow, M.S.; Natelson, B.H.; Stewart, J.M.;
Mathew, S.J. Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome. III. Relationships to cortical glutathione and clinical
symptoms implicate oxidative stress in disorder pathophysiology. NMR Biomed. 2012, 25, 1073–1087. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Yamano, E.; Watanabe, Y.; Kataoka, Y. Insights into metabolite diagnostic biomarkers for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 3423. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Gao, R.; Zhou, D.; Qiu, X.; Zhang, J.; Luo, D.; Yang, X.; Qian, C.; Liu, Z. Cancer therapeutic potential and prognostic value of the
SLC25 mitochondrial carrier family: A review. Cancer Control. 2024, 31, 10732748241287904. [CrossRef]
190. Kong, Z.; Wan, X.; Lu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Liu, Y.; Zhao, P.; Xiang, X.; Li, L. Circular RNA circFOXO3 promotes
prostate cancer progression through sponging miR-29a-3p. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 2020, 24, 799–813. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
191. Cocchetto, A.; Seymour, C.; Mothersill, C. A Proposed New Model to Explain the Role of Low Dose Non-DNA Targeted Radiation
Exposure in Chronic Fatigue and Immune Dysfunction Syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 6022. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
192. Rusin, A.; Seymour, C.; Cocchetto, A.; Mothersill, C. Commonalities in the features of cancer and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS):
Evidence for stress-induced phenotype instability? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Heeran, A.B.; Berrigan, H.P.; Buckley, C.E.; Bottu, H.M.; Prendiville, O.; Buckley, A.M.; Clarke, N.; Donlon, N.E.; Nugent, T.S.;
Durand, M. Radiation-induced Bystander Effect (RIBE) alters mitochondrial metabolism using a human rectal cancer ex vivo
explant model. Transl. Oncol. 2021, 14, 100882. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
194. Nugent, S.M.E.; Mothersill, C.E.; Seymour, C.; McClean, B.; Lyng, F.M.; Murphy, J.E.J. Increased mitochondrial mass in cells with
functionally compromised mitochondria after exposure to both direct gamma radiation and bystander factors. Radiat. Res. 2007,
168, 134–142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Shao, C.; Lyng, F.M.; Folkard, M.; Prise, K.M. Calcium fluxes modulate the radiation-induced bystander responses in targeted
glioma and fibroblast cells. Radiat. Res. 2006, 166, 479–487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. Lyng, F.M.; Maguire, P.; McClean, B.; Seymour, C.; Mothersill, C. The involvement of calcium and MAP kinase signaling pathways
in the production of radiation-induced bystander effects. Radiat. Res. 2006, 165, 400–409. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Tartier, L.; Gilchrist, S.; Burdak-Rothkamm, S.; Folkard, M.; Prise, K.M. Cytoplasmic irradiation induces mitochondrial-dependent
53BP1 protein relocalization in irradiated and bystander cells. Cancer Res. 2007, 67, 5872–5879. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
198. Belyakov, O.V.; Folkard, M.; Mothersill, C.; Prise, K.M.; Michael, B.D. Bystander-induced apoptosis and premature differentiation
in primary urothelial explants after charged particle microbeam irradiation. Radiat. Prot. Dosim. 2002, 99, 249–251. [CrossRef]
199. Lyng, F.M.; Seymour, C.B.; Mothersill, C. Initiation of apoptosis in cells exposed to medium from the progeny of irradiated cells:
A possible mechanism for bystander-induced genomic instability? Radiat. Res. 2002, 157, 365–370. [CrossRef]
200. Koturbash, I.; Loree, J.; Kutanzi, K.; Koganow, C.; Pogribny, I.; Kovalchuk, O. In vivo bystander effect: Cranial X-irradiation leads
to elevated DNA damage, altered cellular proliferation and apoptosis, and increased p53 levels in shielded spleen. Int. J. Radiat.
Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2008, 70, 554–562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Vines, A.M.; Lyng, F.M.; McClean, B.; Seymour, C.; Mothersill, C.E. Bystander effect induced changes in apoptosis related proteins
and terminal differentiation in invitro murine bladder cultures. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2009, 85, 48–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
202. Furlong, H.; Mothersill, C.; Lyng, F.M.; Howe, O. Apoptosis is signalled early by low doses of ionising radiation in a radiation-
induced bystander effect. Mutat. Res.-Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 2013, 741–742, 35–43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Mothersill, C.; Le, M.; Rusin, A.; Seymour, C. Biophotons in Radiobiology: Inhibitors, Communicators and Reactors. Radiat. Prot.
Dosim. 2019, 183, 136–141. [CrossRef]
204. Le, M.; McNeill, F.E.; Seymour, C.; Rainbow, A.J.; Mothersill, C.E. An observed effect of ultraviolet radiation emitted from
beta-irradiated HaCaT cells upon non-beta-irradiated bystander cells. Radiat. Res. 2015, 183, 279–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
205. Glaría, E.; Valledor, A.F. Roles of CD38 in the Immune Response to Infection. Cells 2020, 9, 228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Mottahedeh, J.; Haffner, M.C.; Grogan, T.R.; Hashimoto, T.; Crowell, P.D.; Beltran, H.; Sboner, A.; Bareja, R.; Esopi, D.; Isaacs, W.B.
CD38 is methylated in prostate cancer and regulates extracellular NAD+. Cancer Metab. 2018, 6, 13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
207. Zeidler, J.D.; Hogan, K.A.; Agorrody, G.; Peclat, T.R.; Kashyap, S.; Kanamori, K.S.; Gomez, L.S.; Mazdeh, D.Z.; Warner, G.M.;
Thompson, K.L. The CD38 glycohydrolase and the NAD sink: Implications for pathological conditions. Am. J. Physiol.-Cell Physiol.
2022, 322, C521–C545. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
208. Li, W.; Liang, L.; Liao, Q.; Li, Y.; Zhou, Y. CD38: An important regulator of T cell function. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2022, 153, 113395.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
38 of 45
209. Lee, H.C.; Zhao, Y.J. Resolving the topological enigma in Ca2+ signaling by cyclic ADP-ribose and NAADP. J. Biol. Chem. 2019,
294, 19831–19843. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
210. Kanayama, M.; Luo, J. CD38-Induced apoptosis and mitochondrial damage is restored by nicotinamide in prostate cancer. Front.
Mol. Biosci. 2022, 9, 890402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
211. Huang, Y.; Winkler, P.A.; Sun, W.; Lü, W.; Du, J. Architecture of the TRPM2 channel and its activation mechanism by ADP-ribose
and calcium. Nature 2018, 562, 145–149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
212. Chandel, N.S. Glycolysis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2021, 13, a040535. [CrossRef]
213. Balinas, C.; Cabanas, H.; Staines, D.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. Transient receptor potential melastatin 2 channels are overexpressed
in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients. J. Transl. Med. 2019, 17, 401. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
214. Maes, M.; Bosmans, E.; Kubera, M. Increased expression of activation antigens on CD8+ T lymphocytes in Myalgic En-
cephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: Inverse associations with lowered CD19+ expression and CD4+/CD8+ ratio, but no
associations with (auto) immune, leaky gut, oxidative and nitrosative stress biomarkers. Neuro Endocrinol. Lett. 2015, 36, 439–446.
[PubMed]
215. Cliff, J.M.; King, E.C.; Lee, J.-S.; Sepúlveda, N.; Wolf, A.-S.; Kingdon, C.; Bowman, E.; Dockrell, H.M.; Nacul, L.; Lacerda, E.
Cellular immune function in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Front. Immunol. 2019, 10, 796.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
216. Brenu, E.W.; Huth, T.K.; Hardcastle, S.L.; Fuller, K.; Kaur, M.; Johnston, S.; Ramos, S.B.; Staines, D.R.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S.M.
Role of adaptive and innate immune cells in chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. Int. Immunol. 2014, 26,
233–242. [PubMed]
217. Humer, B.; Dik, W.A.; Versnel, M.A. Advocating the role of trained immunity in the pathogenesis of ME/CFS: A mini review.
Front. Immunol. 2025, 16, 1483764. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
218. Piedra-Quintero, Z.L.; Wilson, Z.; Nava, P.; Guerau-de-Arellano, M. CD38: An immunomodulatory molecule in inflammation
and autoimmunity. Front. Immunol. 2020, 11, 597959. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
219. Chini, C.C.S.; Colman, L.; Palmieri, E.; Strange, J.L.; Kashyap, S.; Han, B.; Benitez-Rosendo, A.; Lopez, G.L.C.; Rabelo, S.P.;
Mukherjee, S. Chronic Cellular NAD Depletion Activates a Viral Infection-Like Interferon Response Through Mitochondrial
DNA Leakage. Aging Cell 2025, 24, e70135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
220. Marlein, C.R.; Piddock, R.E.; Mistry, J.J.; Zaitseva, L.; Hellmich, C.; Horton, R.H.; Zhou, Z.; Auger, M.J.; Bowles, K.M.; Rushworth,
S.A. CD38-driven mitochondrial trafficking promotes bioenergetic plasticity in multiple myeloma. Cancer Res. 2019, 79, 2285–2297.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
221. Dutta, S. CD38 as a driver of ageing: Metabolism. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2025, 22, 137. [CrossRef]
222. Fluge, Ø.; Rekeland, I.G.; Sørland, K.; Alme, K.; Risa, K.; Bruland, O.; Tronstad, K.J.; Mella, O. Plasma cell targeting with the
anti-CD38 antibody daratumumab in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome—A clinical pilot study. Front. Med.
2025, 12, 1607353, Correction in Front. Med. 2025, 12, 1677216. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2025.1677216. [CrossRef]
223. Wohlrab, F.; Eltity, M.; Ufer, F.; Paul, F.; Scheibenbogen, C.; Bellmann-Strobl, J. Autoantibody targeting therapies in post COVID
syndrome and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 2025, 25, 467–471. [CrossRef]
224. Dawood, A.; Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Low dose ionizing radiation and the immune response: What is the role of non-targeted
effects? Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2021, 97, 1368–1382. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
225. Wang, Y.; Yu, J.; Ghosh, T.; Mayassi, N. Beyond the Target: A Review of Radiation-Induced Bystander Effects in Radiobiology and
Radiation Therapy. Preprints 2025. [CrossRef]
226. Liao, E.-C.; Hsu, Y.-T.; Chuah, Q.-Y.; Lee, Y.-J.; Hu, J.-Y.; Huang, T.-C.; Yang, P.-M.; Chiu, S.-J. Radiation induces senescence and a
bystander effect through metabolic alterations. Cell Death Dis. 2014, 5, e1255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
227. Mothersill, C.; Stamato, T.D.; Perez, M.L.; Cummins, R.; Mooney, R.; Seymour, C.B. Involvement of energy metabolism in the
production of ‘bystander effects’ by radiation. Br. J. Cancer 2000, 82, 1740–1746. [PubMed]
228. Guo, S.; Zhou, J.; Chen, X.; Yu, Y.; Ren, M.; Hu, G.; Liu, Y.; Zou, F. Bystander effects of PC12 cells treated with Pb(2)(+) depend
on ROS-mitochondria-dependent apoptotic signaling via gap-junctional intercellular communication. Toxicol. Lett. 2014, 229,
150–157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
229. Jaiswal, H.; Lindqvist, A. Bystander communication and cell cycle decisions after DNA damage. Front. Genet. 2015, 6, 63.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
230. Shi, B.; Wang, W.; Korman, B.; Kai, L.; Wang, Q.; Wei, J.; Bale, S.; Marangoni, R.G.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Miller, S. Targeting
CD38-dependent NAD+ metabolism to mitigate multiple organ fibrosis. Iscience 2021, 24, 101902. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
231. Zhang, W.; Zheng, H.; Pang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, X. CD38-NAD(+) Axis: New Insights into Glaucoma Therapy. Mol. Neurobiol.
2025, 62, 15669–15686. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
232. Pestell, R.G. New roles of cyclin D1. Am. J. Pathol. 2013, 183, 3–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
233. Bergsagel, P.L.; Kuehl, W.M. Chromosome translocations in multiple myeloma. Oncogene 2001, 20, 5611–5622. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
39 of 45
234. Specht, K.; Haralambieva, E.; Bink, K.; Kremer, M.; Mandl-Weber, S.; Koch, I.; Tomer, R.; Hofler, H.; Schuuring, E.; Kluin, P.M.
Different mechanisms of cyclin D1 overexpression in multiple myeloma revealed by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
quantitative analysis of mRNA levels. Blood 2004, 104, 1120–1126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
235. Fu, M.; Wang, C.; Li, Z.; Sakamaki, T.; Pestell, R.G. Minireview: Cyclin D1: Normal and abnormal functions. Endocrinology 2004,
145, 5439–5447. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
236. Aktas, H.; Cai, H.; Cooper, G.M. Ras links growth factor signaling to the cell cycle machinery via regulation of cyclin D1 and the
Cdk inhibitor p27 KIP1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 1997, 17, 3850–3857. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
237. Cai, Z.; Wang, J.; Li, Y.; Shi, Q.; Jin, L.; Li, S.; Zhu, M.; Wang, Q.; Wong, L.L.; Yang, W. Overexpressed Cyclin D1 and CDK4
proteins are responsible for the resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitor in breast cancer that can be reversed by PI3K/mTOR inhibitors.
Sci. China Life Sci. 2023, 66, 94–109. [PubMed]
238. Nangia, V.; Ashraf, H.; Marikar, N.; Passanisi, V.J.; Spencer, S.L. MAPK and mTORC1 signaling converge to drive cyclin D1
protein production to enable cell cycle reentry in melanoma persister cells. Sci. Signal. 2025, 18, eadw3231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
239. Nandi, S.; Bagchi, M.C. Exploring CDKs, Ras-ERK, and PI3K-Akt in abnormal signaling and cancer. J. Cancer Res. Updat. 2022, 11,
63–69. [CrossRef]
240. Sakamaki, T.; Casimiro, M.C.; Ju, X.; Quong, A.A.; Katiyar, S.; Liu, M.; Jiao, X.; Li, A.; Zhang, X.; Lu, Y. Cyclin D1 determines
mitochondrial function invivo. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2006, 26, 5449–5469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
241. Wang, Z.; Fan, M.; Candas, D.; Zhang, T.-Q.; Qin, L.; Eldridge, A.; Wachsmann-Hogiu, S.; Ahmed, K.M.; Chromy, B.A.; Nantajit,
D. Cyclin B1/Cdk1 coordinates mitochondrial respiration for cell-cycle G2/M progression. Dev. cell. 2014, 29, 217–232. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
242. Tchakarska, G.; Roussel, M.; Troussard, X.; Sola, B. Cyclin D1 inhibits mitochondrial activity in B cells. Cancer Res. 2011, 71,
1690–1699. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
243. Pyo, C.-W.; Choi, J.H.; Oh, S.-M.; Choi, S.-Y. Oxidative stress-induced cyclin D1 depletion and its role in cell cycle processing.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta BBA-General. Subj. 2013, 1830, 5316–5325. [CrossRef]
244. Lee, Y.; Dominy, J.E.; Choi, Y.J.; Jurczak, M.; Tolliday, N.; Camporez, J.P.; Chim, H.; Lim, J.-H.; Ruan, H.-B.; Yang, X. Cyclin
D1–Cdk4 controls glucose metabolism independently of cell cycle progression. Nature 2014, 510, 547–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
245. Valenzuela, C.; Brown, N.E. Cyclin D1, Metabolism, and the Autophagy-Senescence Balance. In D-Type Cyclins and Cancer;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 111–131.
246. Washington, T.A.; Haynie, W.S.; Schrems, E.R.; Perry, J.R.; Brown, L.A.; Williams, B.M.; Rosa-Caldwell, M.E.; Lee, D.E.; Brown, J.L.
Effects of PGC-1α overexpression on the myogenic response during skeletal muscle regeneration. Sports Med. Health Sci. 2022, 4,
198–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
247. Wenz, T. Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and PGC-1α under cellular stress. Mitochondrion 2013, 13, 134–142. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
248. Lira, V.A.; Benton, C.R.; Yan, Z.; Bonen, A. PGC-1α regulation by exercise training and its influences on muscle function and
insulin sensitivity. Am. J. Physiol.-Endocrinol. Metab. 2010, 299, E145–E161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
249. Halling, J.F.; Pilegaard, H. PGC-1α-mediated regulation of mitochondrial function and physiological implications. Appl. Physiol.
Nutr. Metab. 2020, 45, 927–936. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
250. Baldelli, S.; Aquilano, K.; Ciriolo, M.R. PGC-1α buffers ROS-mediated removal of mitochondria during myogenesis. Cell Death
Dis. 2014, 5, e1515. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
251. Houten, S.M.; Auwerx, J. PGC-1α: Turbocharging mitochondria. Cell 2004, 119, 5–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
252. Gerwyn, M.; Maes, M. Mechanisms explaining muscle fatigue and muscle pain in patients with myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): A review of recent findings. Curr. Rheumatol. Rep. 2017, 19, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
253. Cheema, A.K.; Tehrani, L.; Patel, S.; Rozenfeld, I.; Renesca, V.; Fornos, A.; Kempuraj, D.; Klimas, N.G. Redefining Mitochondrial
Therapy for ME/CFS: The Case for MOTS-c. Preprints 2025, 2025070058. [CrossRef]
254. Byrne, E.; Trounce, I. Chronic fatigue and myalgia syndrome: Mitochondrial and glycolytic studies in skeletal muscle. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 1987, 50, 743–746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
255. McCully, K.K.; Natelson, B.H.; Iotti, S.; Sisto, S.; Leigh, J.S. Reduced oxidative muscle metabolism in chronic fatigue syndrome.
Muscle Nerve 1996, 19, 621–625. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
256. Lane, R.J.M.; Barrett, M.C.; Taylor, D.J.; Kemp, G.J.; Lodi, R. Heterogeneity in chronic fatigue syndrome: Evidence from magnetic
resonance spectroscopy of muscle. Neuromuscul. Disord. 1998, 8, 204–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
257. Kaneshiro, K.; Sakai, Y.; Suzuki, K.; Uchida, K.; Tateishi, K.; Terashima, Y.; Kawasaki, Y.; Shibanuma, N.; Yoshida, K.; Hashiramoto,
A. Interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor-α cooperatively promote cell cycle regulators and proliferate rheumatoid arthritis
fibroblast-like synovial cells. Scand. J. Rheumatol. 2019, 48, 353–361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
258. Shimura, T.; Fukumoto, M.; Kunugita, N. The role of cyclin D1 in response to long-term exposure to ionizing radiation. Cell Cycle
2013, 12, 2738–2743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
40 of 45
259. Ahmed, K.M.; Fan, M.; Nantajit, D.; Cao, N.; Li, J.J. Cyclin D1 in low-dose radiation-induced adaptive resistance. Oncogene 2008,
27, 6738–6748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
260. Hall, E.J.; Giaccia, A.J. Radiobiology for the Radiologist; Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2006.
261. Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C.B.; Joiner, M.C. Relationship between radiation-induced low-dose hypersensitivity and the bystander
effect. Radiat. Res. 2002, 157, 526–532. [CrossRef]
262. Seymour, C.B.; Mothersill, C. Relative contribution of bystander and targeted cell killing to the low-dose region of the radiation
dose–response curve. Radiat. Res. 2000, 153, 508–511. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
263. Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Radiation-Induced Non-Targeted Effects of Low Doses—What, Why and How? Health Phys. 2011,
100, 302. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
264. Zhao, Y.; Ricci, P.F. Modeling dose-response at low dose: A systems biology approach for ionization radiation. Dose-Response 2010,
8, 456–477. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
265. Mullenders, L.; Atkinson, M.; Paretzke, H.; Sabatier, L.; Bouffler, S. Assessing cancer risks of low-dose radiation. Nat. Rev. Cancer
2009, 9, 596–604. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
266. Suzuki, K.; Yamashita, S. Low-dose radiation exposure and carcinogenesis. Jpn. J. Clin. Oncol. 2012, 42, 563–568. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
267. Rajendran, S.; Harrison, S.H.; Thomas, R.A.; Tucker, J.D. The role of mitochondria in the radiation-induced bystander effect in
human lymphoblastoid cells. Radiat. Res. 2010, 175, 159–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
268. Lee, J.-S.; Kim, H.-G.; Lee, D.-S.; Son, C.-G. Oxidative stress is a convincing contributor to idiopathic chronic fatigue. Sci. Rep.
2018, 8, 12890. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
269. Robbins, M.E.C.; Zhao, W. Chronic oxidative stress and radiation-induced late normal tissue injury: A review. Int. J. Radiat. Biol.
2004, 80, 251–259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
270. Kennedy, G.; Spence, V.A.; McLaren, M.; Hill, A.; Underwood, C.; Belch, J.J.F. Oxidative stress levels are raised in chronic fatigue
syndrome and are associated with clinical symptoms. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2005, 39, 584–589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
271. Meeus, M.; Nijs, J.; Hermans, L.; Goubert, D.; Calders, P. The role of mitochondrial dysfunctions due to oxidative and nitrosative
stress in the chronic pain or chronic fatigue syndromes and fibromyalgia patients: Peripheral and central mechanisms as
therapeutic targets? Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 2013, 17, 1081–1089. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
272. Sawal, H.A.; Asghar, K.; Bureik, M.; Jalal, N. Bystander signaling via oxidative metabolism. OncoTargets Ther. 2017, 10, 3925–3940.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
273. Abeliovich, A.; Schmitz, Y.; Fariñas, I.; Choi-Lundberg, D.; Ho, W.-H.; Castillo, P.E.; Shinsky, N.; Verdugo, J.M.G.; Armanini, M.;
Ryan, A. Mice lacking α-synuclein display functional deficits in the nigrostriatal dopamine system. Neuron 2000, 25, 239–252.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
274. Murphy, D.D.; Rueter, S.M.; Trojanowski, J.Q.; Lee, V.M.-Y. Synucleins are developmentally expressed, and α-synuclein regulates
the size of the presynaptic vesicular pool in primary hippocampal neurons. J. Neurosci. 2000, 20, 3214–3220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
275. Burré, J.; Sharma, M.; Südhof, T.C. Definition of a molecular pathway mediating α-synuclein neurotoxicity. J. Neurosci. 2015, 35,
5221–5232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
276. Burré, J.; Sharma, M.; Südhof, T.C. α-Synuclein assembles into higher-order multimers upon membrane binding to promote
SNARE complex formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, E4274–E4283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
277. Goldstein, D.S. The catecholaldehyde hypothesis: Where MAO fits in. J. Neural Transm. 2020, 127, 169–177, Correction in J. Neural
Transm. 2020, 127, 179. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-019-02128-3. [PubMed]
278. Li, Y.; Jiao, Q.; Du, X.; Jiang, H. Sirt1/FoxO1-associated MAO-A upregulation promotes depressive-like behavior in transgenic
mice expressing human A53T α-synuclein. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2020, 11, 3838–3848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
279. Rouaud, T.; Corbillé, A.-G.; Leclair-Visonneau, L.; de Lataillade, A.d.G.; Lionnet, A.; Preterre, C.; Damier, P.; Derkinderen, P.
Pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease: Mitochondria, alpha-synuclein and much more. . .. Rev. Neurol. 2021, 177, 260–271.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
280. Wang, J.; Ren, B.; Ma, S.; Yang, Y.; Wu, S.; Guan, M. Mechanism of alpha-synuclein in mitochondrial damage induced by
Parkinson’s disease. Chin. J. Tissue Eng. Res. 2025, 29, 3668.
281. Delic, V.; Griffin, J.W.D.; Zivkovic, S.; Zhang, Y.; Phan, T.-A.; Gong, H.; Chaput, D.; Reynes, C.; Dinh, V.B.; Cruz, J. Individual
amino acid supplementation can improve energy metabolism and decrease ROS production in neuronal cells overexpressing
alpha-synuclein. Neuromolecular Med. 2017, 19, 322–344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
282. Kang, S.S.; Ahn, E.H.; Zhang, Z.; Liu, X.; Manfredsson, F.P.; Sandoval, I.M.; Dhakal, S.; Iuvone, P.M.; Cao, X.; Ye, K. α-Synuclein
stimulation of monoamine oxidase-B and legumain protease mediates the pathology of Parkinson’s disease. EMBO J. 2018,
37, e98878. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
283. Ahn, E.H.; Lei, K.; Kang, S.S.; Wang, Z.-H.; Liu, X.; Hong, W.; Wang, Y.T.; Edgington-Mitchell, L.E.; Jin, L.; Ye, K. Mitochondrial
dysfunction triggers the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease in neuronal C/EBPβ transgenic mice. Mol. Psychiatry 2021, 26,
7838–7850. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
41 of 45
284. Vicario, M.; Cieri, D.; Brini, M.; Calì, T. The close encounter between alpha-synuclein and mitochondria. Front. Neurosci. 2018,
12, 388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
285. Nakamura, K. A-Synuclein and mitochondria: Partners in crime? Neurotherapeutics 2013, 10, 391–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
286. Parihar, M.S.; Parihar, A.; Fujita, M.; Hashimoto, M.; Ghafourifar, P. Mitochondrial association of alpha-synuclein causes oxidative
stress. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2008, 65, 1272–1284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
287. Guardia-Laguarta, C.; Area-Gomez, E.; Rüb, C.; Liu, Y.; Magrané, J.; Becker, D.; Voos, W.; Schon, E.A.; Przedborski, S. A-Synuclein
is localized to mitochondria-associated ER membranes. J. Neurosci. 2014, 34, 249–259. [PubMed]
288. Cooper, A.A.; Gitler, A.D.; Cashikar, A.; Haynes, C.M.; Hill, K.J.; Bhullar, B.; Liu, K.; Xu, K.; Strathearn, K.E.; Liu, F. A-Synuclein
blocks ER-Golgi traffic and Rab1 rescues neuron loss in Parkinson’s models. Science 2006, 313, 324–328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
289. Chen, V.; Moncalvo, M.; Tringali, D.; Tagliafierro, L.; Shriskanda, A.; Ilich, E.; Dong, W.; Kantor, B.; Chiba-Falek, O. The
mechanistic role of alpha-synuclein in the nucleus: Impaired nuclear function caused by familial Parkinson’s disease SNCA
mutations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2020, 29, 3107–3121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
290. Weston, L.J.; Bowman, A.M.; Osterberg, V.R.; Meshul, C.K.; Woltjer, R.L.; Unni, V.K. Aggregated alpha-synuclein inclusions
within the nucleus predict impending neuronal cell death in a mouse model of Parkinsonism. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 15294.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
291. Emamzadeh, F.N. Alpha-synuclein structure, functions, and interactions. J. Res. Med. Sci. 2016, 21, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
292. Ferrero, K.; Silver, M.; Cocchetto, A.; Masliah, E.; Langford, D. CNS findings in chronic fatigue syndrome and a neuropathological
case report. J. Investig. Med. 2017, 65, 974–983. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
293. Chinta, S.J.; Mallajosyula, J.K.; Rane, A.; Andersen, J.K. Mitochondrial alpha-synuclein accumulation impairs complex I function
in dopaminergic neurons and results in increased mitophagy in vivo. Neurosci. Lett. 2010, 486, 235–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
294. Martínez, J.H.; Fuentes, F.; Vanasco, V.; Alvarez, S.; Alaimo, A.; Cassina, A.; Leskow, F.C.; Velazquez, F. Alpha-synuclein
mitochondrial interaction leads to irreversible translocation and complex I impairment. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2018, 651, 1–12.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
295. Jishi, A.; Hu, D.; Shang, Y.; Wang, R.; Gunzler, S.A.; Qi, X. BCKDK loss impairs mitochondrial Complex I activity and drives
alpha-synuclein aggregation in models of Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2024, 12, 198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
296. Galán, F.; de Lavera, I.; Cotán, D.; Sánchez-Alcázar, J.A. Mitochondrial myopathy in follow-up of a patient with chronic fatigue
syndrome. J. Investig. Med. High Impact Case Rep. 2015, 3, 2324709615607908. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
297. Holden, S.; Maksoud, R.; Eaton-Fitch, N.; Cabanas, H.; Staines, D.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. A systematic review of mitochondrial
abnormalities in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome/systemic exertion intolerance disease. J. Transl. Med. 2020,
18, 290, Correction in J. Transl. Med. 2020, 18, 407. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-020-02575-7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
298. Tomic, S.; Brkic, S.; Maric, D.; Mikic, A.N. Lipid and protein oxidation in female patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Arch.
Med. Sci. AMS 2012, 8, 886. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
299. Maes, M.; Kubera, M.; Uytterhoeven, M.; Vrydags, N.; Bosmans, E. Increased plasma peroxides as a marker of oxidative stress in
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Med. Sci. Monit. Int. Med. J. Exp. Clin. Res. 2011, 17, SC11.
[CrossRef]
300. Hughes, C.D.; Choi, M.L.; Ryten, M.; Hopkins, L.; Drews, A.; Botía, J.A.; Iljina, M.; Rodrigues, M.; Gagliano, S.A.; Gandhi,
S. Picomolar concentrations of oligomeric alpha-synuclein sensitizes TLR4 to play an initiating role in Parkinson’s disease
pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol. 2019, 137, 103–120. [PubMed]
301. Dzamko, N.; Gysbers, A.; Perera, G.; Bahar, A.; Shankar, A.; Gao, J.; Fu, Y.; Halliday, G.M. Toll-like receptor 2 is increased in
neurons in Parkinson’s disease brain and may contribute to alpha-synuclein pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 2017, 133, 303–319.
[PubMed]
302. Shao, Q.-H.; Yan, W.-F.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, K.-L.; Peng, S.-Y.; Cao, Y.-L.; Yuan, Y.-H.; Chen, N.-H. Nurr1: A vital participant in the
TLR4-NF-κB signal pathway stimulated by α-synuclein in BV-2 cells. Neuropharmacology 2019, 144, 388–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
303. Dutta, D.; Jana, M.; Majumder, M.; Mondal, S.; Roy, A.; Pahan, K. Selective targeting of the TLR2/MyD88/NF-κB pathway
reduces α-synuclein spreading in vitro and in vivo. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 5382. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
304. Broderick, G.; Katz, B.Z.; Fernandes, H.; Fletcher, M.A.; Klimas, N.; Smith, F.A.; O’Gorman, M.R.G.; Vernon, S.D.; Taylor, R.
Cytokine expression profiles of immune imbalance in post-mononucleosis chronic fatigue. J. Transl. Med. 2012, 10, 191. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
305. Zuo, L.-J.; Yu, S.-Y.; Wang, F.; Hu, Y.; Piao, Y.-S.; Du, Y.; Lian, T.-H.; Wang, R.-D.; Yu, Q.-J.; Wang, Y.-J. Parkinson’s disease with
fatigue: Clinical characteristics and potential mechanisms relevant to α-synuclein oligomer. J. Clin. Neurol. 2016, 12, 172–180.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
306. Wang, L.; Yi, H.; Liang, X.; Xu, F.; Li, T.; Yang, X.; Wei, M.; Ou, Z.; Tong, Q. Plasma TNF-α and phosphorylated α-syn are
associated with fatigue in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuroimmunol. 2023, 385, 578222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
42 of 45
307. Saligan, L.N.; Hsiao, C.P.; Wang, D.; Wang, X.M.; John, L.S.; Kaushal, A.; Citrin, D.; Barb, J.J.; Munson, P.J.; Dionne, R.A.
Upregulation of α-synuclein during localized radiation therapy signals the association of cancer-related fatigue with the
activation of inflammatory and neuroprotective pathways. Brain Behav. Immun. 2013, 27, 63–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
308. Murphy, E.K.; Perl, D.P.; Day, R.M.; Iacono, D. Evaluating Parkinson’s disease biomarkers in substantia nigra following sublethal
γ-radiation exposure in a large animal model. npj Park. Dis. 2025, 11, 286. [CrossRef]
309. Sharma, N.K.; Sharma, R.; Mathur, D.; Sharad, S.; Minhas, G.; Bhatia, K.; Anand, A.; Ghosh, S.P. Role of ionizing radiation in
neurodegenerative diseases. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2018, 10, 134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
310. Stefi, A.L.; Margaritis, L.H.; Skouroliakou, A.S.; Vassilacopoulou, D. Mobile phone electromagnetic radiation affects Amyloid
Precursor Protein and α-synuclein metabolism in SH-SY5Y cells. Pathophysiology 2019, 26, 203–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
311. Morris, G.; Maes, M. Case definitions and diagnostic criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis and Chronic fatigue Syndrome: From
clinical-consensus to evidence-based case definitions. Neuroendocrinol. Lett. 2013, 34, 185–199. [PubMed]
312. Lacerda, E.M.; Kingdon, C.C.; Bowman, E.W.; Nacul, L. Using a participatory approach to develop and implement the UK
ME/CFS Biobank. Fatigue Biomed. Health Behav. 2018, 6, 1–4.
313. Das, S.; Taylor, K.; Kozubek, J.; Sardell, J.; Gardner, S. Genetic risk factors for ME/CFS identified using combinatorial analysis. J.
Transl. Med. 2022, 20, 598. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
314. Huang, K.; Gc de Sá, A.; Thomas, N.; Phair, R.D.; Gooley, P.R.; Ascher, D.B.; Armstrong, C.W. Discriminating myalgic en-
cephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and comorbid conditions using metabolomics in UK Biobank. Commun. Med. 2024,
4, 248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
315. Lacerda, E.M.; Bowman, E.W.; Cliff, J.M.; Kingdon, C.C.; King, E.C.; Lee, J.-S.; Clark, T.G.; Dockrell, H.M.; Riley, E.M.; Curran,
H. The UK ME/CFS biobank for biomedical research on myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and
multiple sclerosis. Open J. Bioresour. 2017, 4, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
316. Hajdarevic, R.; Lande, A.; Mehlsen, J.; Rydland, A.; Sosa, D.D.; Strand, E.B.; Mella, O.; Pociot, F.; Fluge, Ø.; Lie, B.A. Genetic
association study in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) identifies several potential risk loci. Brain
Behav. Immun. 2022, 102, 362–369. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
317. Samms, G.L.; Ponting, C.P. Defining a High-Quality Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome cohort in UK Biobank.
NIHR Open Res. 2025, 5, 39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
318. Caines, J.K.; Barnes, D.A.; Berry, M.D. The use of seahorse XF assays to interrogate real-time energy metabolism in cancer cell
lines. In Cancer Cell Biology: Methods and Protocols; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022; pp. 225–234.
319. Desousa, B.R.; Kim, K.K.O.; Jones, A.E.; Ball, A.B.; Hsieh, W.Y.; Swain, P.; Morrow, D.H.; Brownstein, A.J.; Ferrick, D.A.; Shirihai,
O.S. Calculation of ATP production rates using the Seahorse XF Analyzer. EMBO Rep. 2023, 24, e56380. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
320. Huang, M.; Camara, A.K.S.; Stowe, D.F.; Qi, F.; Beard, D.A. Mitochondrial inner membrane electrophysiology assessed by
rhodamine-123 transport and fluorescence. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2007, 35, 1276–1285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
321. Perelman, A.; Wachtel, C.; Cohen, M.; Haupt, S.; Shapiro, H.; Tzur, A. JC-1: Alternative excitation wavelengths facilitate
mitochondrial membrane potential cytometry. Cell Death Dis. 2012, 3, e430. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
322. Sivandzade, F.; Bhalerao, A.; Cucullo, L. Analysis of the mitochondrial membrane potential using the cationic JC-1 dye as a
sensitive fluorescent probe. Bio-Protoc. 2019, 9, e3128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
323. Kauffman, M.E.; Kauffman, M.K.; Traore, K.; Zhu, H.; Trush, M.A.; Jia, Z.; Li, Y.R. MitoSOX-based flow cytometry for detecting
mitochondrial ROS. React. Oxyg. Species 2016, 2, 361.
324. Eruslanov, E.; Kusmartsev, S. Identification of ROS using oxidized DCFDA and flow-cytometry. In Advanced Protocols in Oxidative
Stress II; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009; pp. 57–72.
325. Figueroa, D.; Asaduzzaman, M.; Young, F. Real time monitoring and quantification of reactive oxygen species in breast cancer
cell line MCF-7 by 2′, 7′–dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA) assay. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol. Methods 2018, 94, 26–33. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
326. Roe, M.W.; Lemasters, J.J.; Herman, B. Assessment of Fura-2 for measurements of cytosolic free calcium. Cell Calcium 1990, 11,
63–73. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
327. Barreto-Chang, O.L.; Dolmetsch, R.E. Calcium imaging of cortical neurons using Fura-2 AM. J. Vis. Exp. JoVE 2009, 1067.
[PubMed]
328. Bosi, A.; Olivieri, G. Variability of the adaptive response to ionizing radiations in humans. Mutat. Res. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 1989,
211, 13–17. [CrossRef]
329. Tang, F.R.; Loke, W.K. Molecular mechanisms of low dose ionizing radiation-induced hormesis, adaptive responses, radioresis-
tance, bystander effects, and genomic instability. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2015, 91, 13–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
330. Mothersill, C.; Seymour, C. Radiation-induced bystander effects: Evidence for an adaptive response to low dose exposures?
Dose-Response 2006, 4, 283–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
43 of 45
331. Rodel, F.; Frey, B.; Multhoff, G.; Gaipl, U. Contribution of the immune system to bystander and non-targeted effects of ionizing
radiation. Cancer Lett. 2015, 356, 105–113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
332. Sharetski˘ı, A.N.; Kharlamov, V.A.; Surinov, B.P. Effect of radiation-induced bystander chemosignals of mice on the humoral
immune response in spleen and lymph nodes of intact recipients. Radiatsionnaia Biol. Radioecol. 2011, 52, 229–233.
333. Pajonk, F.; Chiang, C.-S.; Sun, J.-R.; McBride, W.H. NF-κB, cytokines, proteasomes, and low-dose radiation exposure. Mil. Med.
2002, 167, 66–67. [CrossRef]
334. Hallahan, D.E.; Haimovitz-Friedman, A.; Kufe, D.W.; Fuks, Z.; Weichselbaum, R.R. The role of cytokines in radiation oncology.
Important Adv. Oncol. 1993, 71–80. [PubMed]
335. Facoetti, A.; Mariotti, L.; Ballarini, F.; Bertolotti, A.; Nano, R.; Pasi, F.; Ranza, E.; Ottolenghi, A. Experimental and theoretical
analysis of cytokine release for the study of radiation-induced bystander effect. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2009, 85, 690–699. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
336. Milivojevic, M.; Che, X.; Bateman, L.; Cheng, A.; Garcia, B.A.; Hornig, M.; Huber, M.; Klimas, N.G.; Lee, B.; Lee, H. Plasma
proteomic profiling suggests an association between antigen driven clonal B cell expansion and ME/CFS. PLoS ONE 2020,
15, e0236148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
337. Fluge, Ø.; Mella, O. Clinical impact of B-cell depletion with the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab in chronic fatigue syndrome: A
preliminary case series. BMC Neurol. 2009, 9, 28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
338. Bradley, A.S.; Ford, B.; Bansal, A.S. Altered functional B cell subset populations in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome
compared to healthy controls. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2013, 172, 73–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
339. Mensah, F.; Bansal, A.; Berkovitz, S.; Sharma, A.; Reddy, V.; Leandro, M.J.; Cambridge, G. Extended B cell phenotype in patients
with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: A cross-sectional study. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2016, 184, 237–247.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
340. Ramos, S.; Brenu, E.; Nuyen, T.; Ng, J.; Staines, D. Characterisation of B cell subsets and receptors in chronic fatigue syndrome
patients. J. Clin. Cell Immunol. 2015, 16, 35. [CrossRef]
341. Ono, H.; Sato, W.; Yamamura, T. Dysregulation of T and B cells in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Neurol.
Sci. 2017, 381, 899–900. [CrossRef]
342. Camponeschi, A.; Kläsener, K.; Sundell, T.; Lundqvist, C.; Manna, P.T.; Ayoubzadeh, N.; Sundqvist, M.; Thorarinsdottir, K.; Gatto,
M.; Visentini, M. Human CD38 regulates B cell antigen receptor dynamic organization in normal and malignant B cells. J. Exp.
Med. 2022, 219, e20220201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
343. Funaro, A.; Morra, M.; Calosso, L.; Zini, M.G.; Ausiello, C.M.; Malavasi, F. Role of the human CD38 molecule in B cell activation
and proliferation. Tissue Antigens 1997, 49, 7–15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
344. Deterre, P.; Berthelier, V.; Bauvois, B.; Dalloul, A.; Schuber, F.; Lund, F. CD38 in T-and B-cell functions. Chem. Immunol. 2000, 75,
146–168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
345. Zeng, F.; Zhang, J.; Jin, X.; Liao, Q.; Chen, Z.; Luo, G.; Zhou, Y. Effect of CD38 on B-cell function and its role in the diagnosis and
treatment of B-cell-related diseases. J. Cell. Physiol. 2022, 237, 2796–2807. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
346. Wojewózka, M.; Kruszewski, M.; Szumiel, I. Anti-CD38 prevents the development of the adaptive response induced by X-rays in
human lymphocytes. Mutagenesis 1996, 11, 593–596. [CrossRef]
347. He, Z.; Yue, C.; Chen, X.; Li, X.; Zhang, L.; Tan, S.; Yi, X.; Luo, G.; Zhou, Y. Integrative analysis identified CD38 as a key node that
correlates highly with immunophenotype, chemoradiotherapy resistance, and prognosis of head and neck cancer. J. Cancer 2023,
14, 72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
348. Bocuzzi, V.; Bridoux, J.; Pirotte, M.; Withofs, N.; Hustinx, R.; D’Huyvetter, M.; Caers, J.; Marcion, G. CD38 as theranostic target in
oncology. J. Transl. Med. 2024, 22, 998, Correction in J. Transl. Med. 2024, 22, 1113. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-024-05959-1.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
349. Hsu, L.J.; Sagara, Y.; Arroyo, A.; Rockenstein, E.; Sisk, A.; Mallory, M.; Wong, J.; Takenouchi, T.; Hashimoto, M.; Masliah,
E. Alpha-Synuclein Promotes Mitochondrial Deficit and Oxidative Stress. Am. J. Pathol. 2000, 157, 401–410. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
350. Lorimore, S.A.; Rastogi, S.; Mukherjee, D.; Coates, P.J.; Wright, E.G. The influence of p53 functions on radiation-induced
inflammatory bystander-type signaling in murine bone marrow. Radiat. Res. 2013, 179, 406–415. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
351. Le, M.; McNeill, F.E.; Seymour, C.B.; Rusin, A.; Diamond, K.; Rainbow, A.J.; Murphy, J.; Mothersill, C.E. Modulation of oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) by radiation- induced biophotons. Environ. Res. 2018, 163, 80–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
352. Wang, J.; Jackson, M.F.; Xie, Y.-F. Glia and TRPM2 channels in plasticity of central nervous system and Alzheimer’s diseases.
Neural Plast. 2016, 2016, 1680905. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
353. Moran, M.M.; Xu, H.; Clapham, D.E. TRP ion channels in the nervous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2004, 14, 362–369. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
44 of 45
354. Lee, K.; Jo, Y.Y.; Chung, G.; Jung, J.H.; Kim, Y.H.; Park, C.-K. Functional importance of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels
in neurological disorders. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2021, 9, 611773. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
355. Belrose, J.C.; Jackson, M.F. TRPM2: A candidate therapeutic target for treating neurological diseases. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 2018, 39,
722–732. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
356. Nazıro˘glu, M. TRPM2 cation channels, oxidative stress and neurological diseases: Where are we now? Neurochem. Res. 2011, 36,
355–366. [PubMed]
357. Malko, P.; Syed Mortadza, S.A.; McWilliam, J.; Jiang, L.-H. TRPM2 channel in microglia as a new player in neuroinflammation
associated with a spectrum of central nervous system pathologies. Front. Pharmacol. 2019, 10, 239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
358. Shimura, T.; Kunugita, N. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species-mediated genomic instability in low-dose irradiated human
cells through nuclear retention of cyclin D1. Cell Cycle 2016, 15, 1410–1414. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
359. Beltran, E.; Fresquet, V.; Martinez-Useros, J.; Richter-Larrea, J.A.; Sagardoy, A.; Sesma, I.; Almada, L.L.; Montes-Moreno, S.;
Siebert, R.; Gesk, S. A cyclin-D1 interaction with BAX underlies its oncogenic role and potential as a therapeutic target in mantle
cell lymphoma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 12461–12466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
360. Morris, E.J.; Keramaris, E.; Rideout, H.J.; Slack, R.S.; Dyson, N.J.; Stefanis, L.; Park, D.S. Cyclin-dependent kinases and P53
pathways are activated independently and mediate Bax activation in neurons after DNA damage. J. Neurosci. 2001, 21, 5017–5026.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
361. Huang, W.-W.; Yang, J.-S.; Pai, S.-J.; Wu, P.-P.; Chang, S.-J.; Chueh, F.-S.; Fan, M.-J.; Chiou, S.-M.; Kuo, H.-M.; Yeh, C.-C.
Bufalin induces G0/G1 phase arrest through inhibiting the levels of cyclin D, cyclin E, CDK2 and CDK4, and triggers
apoptosis via mitochondrial signaling pathway in T24 human bladder cancer cells. Mutat. Res. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 2012,
732, 26–33. [CrossRef]
362. Gil-Gómez, G.; Berns, A.; Brady, H.J.M. A link between cell cycle and cell death: Bax and Bcl-2 modulate Cdk2 activation during
thymocyte apoptosis. EMBO J. 1998, 17, 7209–7218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
363. Ojo-Amaize, E.A.; Conley, E.J.; Peter, J.B. Decreased natural killer cell activity is associated with severity of chronic fatigue
immune dysfunction syndrome. Clin. Infect. Dis. 1994, 18, S157–S159. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
364. Schlauch, K.A.; Khaiboullina, S.F.; De Meirleir, K.L.; Rawat, S.; Petereit, J.; Rizvanov, A.A.; Blatt, N.; Mijatovic, T.; Kulick, D.;
Palotas, A. Genome-wide association analysis identifies genetic variations in subjects with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome. Transl. Psychiatry 2016, 6, e730. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
365. Badawy, A.A.-B.; Morgan, C.J.; Llewelyn, M.B.; Albuquerque, S.R.J.; Farmer, A. Heterogeneity of serum tryptophan concentration
and availability to the brain in patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Psychopharmacol. 2005, 19, 385–391. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
366. Patarca, R. Cytokines and chronic fatigue syndrome. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2001, 933, 185–200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
367. Broderick, G.; Fuite, J.; Kreitz, A.; Vernon, S.D.; Klimas, N.; Fletcher, M.A. A formal analysis of cytokine networks in chronic
fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav. Immun. 2010, 24, 1209–1217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
368. Mothersill, C.E.; Rusin, A.; Fernandez-Palomo, C.; Seymour, C.B. History of bystander effects research 1905-present; what is in a
name? Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2018, 94, 696–707. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
369. Duli´c, V.; Kaufmann, W.K.; Wilson, S.J.; Tisty, T.D.; Lees, E.; Harper, J.W.; Elledge, S.J.; Reed, S.I. P53-dependent inhibition of
cyclin-dependent kinase activities in human fibroblasts during radiation-induced G1 arrest. Cell 1994, 76, 1013–1023. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
370. Wang, C.; Li, Z.; Lu, Y.; Du, R.; Katiyar, S.; Yang, J.; Fu, M.; Leader, J.E.; Quong, A.; Novikoff, P.M. Cyclin D1 repression of
nuclear respiratory factor 1 integrates nuclear DNA synthesis and mitochondrial function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006, 103,
11567–11572. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
371. Scheibenbogen, C.; Bellmann-Strobl, J.T.; Heindrich, C.; Wittke, K.; Stein, E.; Franke, C.; Prüss, H.; Preßler, H.; Machule,
M.-L.; Audebert, H. Fighting Post-COVID and ME/CFS–development of curative therapies. Front. Med. 2023, 10, 1194754.
[CrossRef]
372. Roerink, M.E.; Bredie, S.J.H.; Heijnen, M.; Dinarello, C.A.; Knoop, H.; Van der Meer, J.W.M. Cytokine inhibition in patients with
chronic fatigue syndrome: A randomized trial. Ann. Intern. Med. 2017, 166, 557–564. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
373. Yang, T.; Yang, Y.; Wang, D.; Li, C.; Qu, Y.; Guo, J.; Shi, T.; Bo, W.; Sun, Z.; Asakawa, T. The clinical value of cytokines in chronic
fatigue syndrome. J. Transl. Med. 2019, 17, 213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
374. Moodley, D.; Yoshida, H.; Mostafavi, S.; Asinovski, N.; Ortiz-Lopez, A.; Symanowicz, P.; Telliez, J.-B.; Hegen, M.; Clark, J.D.;
Mathis, D. Network pharmacology of JAK inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 9852–9857. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
375. Ruan, B.T.; Bulbule, S.; Gile, B.; Reyes, A.; Chheda, B.; Bateman, L.; Bell, J.; Yellman, B.; Grach, S.L.; Berner, J. Low-dose rapamycin
alleviates clinical symptoms of fatigue and PEM in ME/CFS patients via improvement of autophagy: A pilot study. J. Transl. Med.
2025, 23, 1148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 6535
45 of 45
376. Aliashrafzadeh, H.; Liu, D.; De Alba, S.; Akbar, I.; Lui, A.; Vanleuven, J.; Martin, R.; Wang, Z.; Liu, D.Z. Experimental and
clinical tests of FDA-approved kinase inhibitors for the treatment of neurological disorders (update 2024). Explor. Drug Sci. 2025,
3, 1008116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
377. Felis-Giemza, A.; Massalska, M.; Roszkowski, L.; Romanowska-Próchnicka, K.; Ciechomska, M. Potential mechanism of fatigue
induction and its management by JAK inhibitors in inflammatory rheumatic diseases. J. Inflamm. Res. 2023, 16, 3949–3965.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27146535
