1
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
ADDRESS-­LC: study protocol for a 
phase 2, triple-­blind, randomised, 
placebo-­controlled trial to evaluate the 
efficacy and safety of bezisterim 
(NE3107) in adults with long COVID
Penelope Markham  ‍ ‍ ,1 Michael J Peluso,2 Sherry Hsiang-­Yi Chou,3 
Lisa McCorkell,4 Stephen O’Quinn,5 Christopher Reading,1 Clarence Ahlem,1 
Chantal M Petit,6 Jiayan Yan,1 Joseph M Palumbo1
To cite: Markham P, Peluso MJ, 
Hsiang-­Yi Chou S, et al. 
ADDRESS-­LC: study protocol 
for a phase 2, triple-­blind, 
randomised, placebo-­
controlled trial to evaluate 
the efficacy and safety of 
bezisterim (NE3107) in adults 
with long COVID. BMJ Open 
2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2026-118726
	
►Prepublication history 
and additional supplemental 
material for this paper are 
available online. To view these 
files, please visit the journal 
online (https://doi.org/10.1136/​
bmjopen-2026-118726).
Received 23 February 2026
Accepted 08 July 2026
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Penelope Markham;  
​pmarkham@​bioviepharma.​com
Protocol
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2026. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No 
commercial re-­use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ Group.
ABSTRACT
Introduction  Long COVID is a debilitating condition 
consisting of prolonged neurological symptoms 
such as cognitive impairment (‘brain fog’) and sleep 
disturbance. Symptoms may be associated with 
ongoing neuroinflammation from the persistence of a 
viral reservoir, activation of other viruses, protracted 
macrophagic inflammatory memory or enduring viral Spike 
protein that stimulates proinflammatory cytokines via toll-­
like receptor (TLR) signalling. Bezisterim (NE3107) is an 
oral, blood–brain barrier-­permeable, anti-­inflammatory, 
insulin-­sensitising dehydroepiandrosterone derivative 
that inhibits TLR-­driven neuroinflammation and is being 
developed for neurodegenerative diseases in which TLR-­
driven inflammation contributes to cognitive decline.
Methods and analysis  ADDRESS-­LC (NCT06847191) is 
a phase 2, triple-­blind, placebo-­controlled, randomised 
proof-­of-­concept study to evaluate the efficacy and safety 
of bezisterim in adults with long COVID. This multicentre 
study will recruit 208 adults (aged 18–69 years) with 
symptoms of fatigue and neurocognitive impairment 
for at least 3 months following an index SARS-­CoV-­2 
infection. Individuals who meet all eligibility criteria will 
be randomised 1:1 to receive bezisterim 20 mg or placebo 
two times per day for 12 weeks. Cognition, fatigue, sleep, 
post-­exertional malaise, quality of life and burdensome 
symptoms will be evaluated via several assessments, 
including a bespoke Cogstate Cognition Battery, Patient-­
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS) Cognitive Function Short Form (SF)-­8a, PROMIS 
Fatigue SF-­13a and Patient’s Global Impression of Severity, 
among others.
Ethics and dissemination  The protocol has been 
approved by an institutional review board prior to study 
initiation. The study is being conducted at multiple 
clinical research sites across the USA. A current list of 
participating study sites is publicly available through the ​
ClinicalTrials.​gov registration record (NCT06847191). 
The study protocol has received central institutional 
review board approval (Advarra #Pro00081088), and 
participating sites obtained the necessary approvals and 
agreements required for study conduct and data access in 
accordance with applicable regulations and Good Clinical 
Practice guidelines. Authorised representatives of the 
sponsor, regulatory authorities and ethics committees may 
access study-­related records for monitoring, auditing and 
regulatory purposes consistent with participant informed 
consent. The study will disseminate results through 
academic publication and conference presentations.
Trial registration number  NCT06847191.
INTRODUCTION
Post-­acute sequelae of COVID-­2019 (PASC/
COVID-­19), often referred to as long COVID, 
is an infection-­associated chronic condition 
that occurs after SARS-­CoV-­2 infection and 
is present for at least 3 months as a contin-
uous, relapsing and remitting, or progressive 
disease state that affects one or more organ 
systems.1–3 While there may be some protec-
tive effects from vaccination, long COVID was 
still estimated to affect ~400 million individ-
uals worldwide in 2023, and data collected 
from 2022 to 2024 via the US Census Bureau 
Household Pulse Survey estimate that ~18% 
of adults in the USA have experienced long 
COVID.4 5
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
	
⇒Randomised, placebo-­controlled, multicentre design 
enhances internal validity.
	
⇒Triple-­masked design minimises bias across partic-
ipants and investigators.
	
⇒Eligibility 
confirmed 
by 
sponsor 
Enrollment 
Authorization Committee.
	
⇒Short post-­treatment follow-­up limits assessment of 
durability of response.
	
⇒Absence of validated biomarkers for long COVID in-
troduces diagnostic heterogeneity.

2
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
Individuals with long COVID may experience a broad 
range of mild to severe symptoms that can persist for 
months or years following the inciting infection.1 2 Long 
COVID remains a major public health concern, affecting 
millions of US adults, with the associated symptoms leading 
to significant decreases in quality of life and potentially 
long-­term disability.3 6 Fatigue and brain fog (ie, cogni-
tive impairment manifesting as poor memory or difficulty 
in thinking or concentrating) are among the most debil-
itating symptoms and can have a profound impact on 
daily life and the ability to work.7–10 Regardless of type or 
severity, neurological symptoms following a SARS-­CoV-­2 
infection can be relatively long lasting, with one study 
showing 85% of patients experiencing continued long 
COVID symptoms 12 months after symptom onset.11 12
Long COVID has also been associated with an increased 
risk for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue 
syndrome and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome 
(POTS).13 14 These conditions, which also include deficits 
in memory, attention, executive function and processing 
speed, can be triggered by viral infections.13–17 Shared 
clinical features between infection-­associated chronic 
conditions suggest that there may be similar underlying 
pathology.15 16 18 19
Mechanisms underlying the neurological symptoms 
of long COVID require further characterisation, but 
chronic inflammation is thought to be a significant 
contributor.20 21 Growing evidence suggests that cogni-
tive impairments are related to a chronic inflammatory 
state, potentially caused by persistence of a viral reser-
voir, activation of other viruses and/or protracted macro-
phagic inflammatory memory.7 Specifically, long COVID 
has been associated with persistent plasma elevations of 
proinflammatory cytokines that modulate neurocircuitry 
related to learning and memory under normal physio-
logic conditions, but that may promote neuronal death 
and cognitive dysfunction when their equilibrium shifts to 
a chronic, elevated state.3 22 Additionally, COVID-­19 can 
trigger epigenetic changes that affect post-­infection equi-
librium among these cytokines.23 Blood–brain barrier 
(BBB) disruption can occur during both acute infection 
and long COVID, and the extent of this disruption is 
strongly linked to cognitive impairment.24 Recent posi-
tron emission tomography data demonstrated increased 
glial activation in long COVID, further supporting the 
role of a neuroimmune response in neurological symp-
toms.25 26
SARS-­CoV-­2 Spike protein is a highly inflammatory 
protein that mediates cell entry and has been shown to 
cross the BBB.27 Spike protein has been detected in skull, 
meninges and brain samples from patients who died 
from non-­COVID-­19-­related causes long after infection.28 
Additionally, circulating SARS-­CoV-­2 Spike protein has 
been detected in patients with long COVID for up to 14 
months post infection, suggesting a role for persistent 
Spike protein in long COVID symptoms.29–31 One postu-
lated mechanism is that Spike protein binds to membrane 
receptor for advanced glycation end products and toll-­like 
receptor 4 (TLR4) with high specificity, creating a proin-
flammatory feedback loop involving the interleukin-­6 
(IL-­6), tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-­1β triad.32 33 
Specifically, Spike S1 protein may activate TLR4, subse-
quently promoting proinflammatory cytokine expression 
via nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) and extracellular 
signal-­regulated kinase (ERK) signalling.33–37 This excess 
production of inflammatory mediators could serve as a 
mechanism for neurological impairment given the func-
tional role of these cytokines in mood and cognition.21 
Consistent with this, rodent studies have shown that 
Spike protein induces cognitive deficits and neurodegen-
eration via TLR4 activation.34 A recent study found that 
hippocampal injection of S1 protein in mice produced 
cognitive impairment, neuronal loss and neuroinflam-
mation, with the corresponding inflammatory phenotype 
significantly reduced by pretreatment with a selective 
TLR4 inhibitor.36 Additionally, TLR4 variants have been 
associated with cognitive outcomes and severity in long 
COVID.19 34
Bezisterim (NE3107) is a synthetic analogue of a phar-
macologically active metabolite of dehydroepiandroste-
rone, androst-­5-­ene-­3β−7β−17β-triol (figure  1), that has 
anti-­inflammatory and insulin-­sensitising activity, without 
being immunosuppressive, as well as good oral bioavail-
ability and BBB permeability.38 39 Based on current studies, 
bezisterim’s anti-­inflammatory mechanisms may have the 
potential to reduce the neurocognitive symptoms asso-
ciated with long COVID by inhibiting TLR-­driven phos-
phorylation of ERK and NF-κB signalling.38–47 In vitro 
studies have demonstrated that bezisterim binds ERK and 
reduces proinflammatory signalling downstream of TLR-­4 
activation leading to decreased activation and nuclear 
translocation of NF-κB and the expression of proinflam-
matory cytokines.39 42 43 Preclinical studies have demon-
strated BBB permeability, antineuroinflammatory and 
neuroprotective properties in rodent models of neurode-
generation, including Parkinson’s disease (PD), through 
reduced activation of NF-κB, reduced microglial activity, 
improved motor function and reduced inflammation.45–47 
In exploratory analyses of a subgroup of 50 subjects with 
mild to moderate probable Alzheimer’s disease, improve-
ments in cognitive and functional performance measures 
showed correlations with biological age (determined by 
Figure 1  Bezisterim, 17α-ethynyl-­androst-­5-­ene-­3β, 
7β-triol.

3
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
DNA methylation ‘clocks’), metabolism, inflammation 
and dementia biomarkers in those treated with bezisterim 
compared with placebo.38 Bezisterim was well tolerated 
with no potential safety signals identified. In vitro studies 
indicate that bezisterim is primarily metabolised by cyto-
chrome P450 (CYP)3A4 without evidence of inhibition or 
induction, and metabolites found in human plasma have 
not shown CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 inhibition, suggesting a 
low potential for drug:drug interactions. Collectively, the 
mechanism of action and the safety data for bezisterim 
indicate that it is likely to have minimal safety risks and 
may provide a beneficial effect on the cognitive symptoms 
of long COVID.44
METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Study design
ADDRESS-­LC is an ongoing phase 2, randomised, 
placebo-­controlled, proof-­of-­concept, multicentre trial to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of bezisterim in US adults 
18–69 years of age with long COVID symptoms lasting ≥3 
months (NCT06847191). This study uses a triple-­masked 
design in which participants, investigators, outcome asses-
sors and sponsor personnel remain blinded to treatment 
allocation throughout the study. The trial design includes 
a screening period of up to 4 weeks, a 12-­week intervention 
period and a 4-­week follow-­up period, for a total duration 
of up to 20 weeks (figure 2). There are six planned visits 
during which written informed consent, medical history, 
labs and administration of clinical outcome assessments, 
such as the bespoke Cogstate Cognition Battery, various 
patient-­reported outcome (PRO) assessment tools, 
Patient Health Questionnaire-­2 (PHQ-­2) and Columbia-­
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-­SSRS) Screening/Base-
line Form will be obtained. See online supplemental 
exhibit 1 for full details and Schedule of Activities. The 
total time required to complete all assessments at site visits 
during the treatment period is approximately 2 hours, 
although the overall visit duration may be longer due to 
optional breaks between assessments. Assessments at the 
screening visit, which include additional PRO assessments 
for eligibility, take approximately 3 hours to complete. 
Eligibility is confirmed by the sponsor Eligibility Authori-
zation Committee. During the baseline (BL) visit (visit 2), 
individuals meeting the eligibility criteria are stratified by 
age (≥18 to ≤45 years or >45 to <70 years) and symptom 
duration (<2 years or ≥2 years) and randomised 1:1 to 
receive either bezisterim 20 mg or placebo throughout 
the 12-­week intervention period.
Patient and public involvement
Patients with lived experience and clinicians with exper-
tise in treating patients with long COVID were involved in 
the design of this research, including advising on efficacy 
outcomes, patient burden, recruitment strategies and 
anticipated concomitant medications in the population.
Participants
As of 15 May 2026, enrolment was completed with 
a total of 20 clinical sites activated and 203 partici-
pants randomised; study completion is anticipated in 
September 2026. Participants who met all prespecified 
inclusion criteria (box  1) and none of the exclusion 
criteria (box  2) were considered eligible. Participants 
were included if they had fatigue and neurocognitive 
impairment attributed to an index SARS-­CoV-­2 infection 
with symptoms ≥3 months as demonstrated by a PROMIS 
Cognitive Function Short Form (SF)-­8a T-­score ≤40 and 
a PROMIS Fatigue SF-­13a T-­score ≥50. Participants were 
deemed ineligible if they met any of the following criteria, 
among others (box 2): tested positive for SARS-­CoV-­2 in 
the past 28 days; received a vaccination for COVID-­19 
or influenza within 14 days of randomisation; required 
admission to the intensive care unit for COVID-­19-­related 
symptoms; prior or active unstable or progressive major 
psychiatric or neurologic conditions; attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder treated with stimulants; fibromy-
algia or POTS prior to index infection; currently taking 
naltrexone at a daily dose >4.5 mg/day; or received a 
potent CYP3A4 inhibitor within 14 days prior to rando-
misation or within five half-­lives of the CYP3A4 inhib-
itor, whichever is shorter. Participants may be withdrawn 
from the study at the investigator’s discretion or for any 
of the following reasons: pregnancy, significant protocol 
Figure 2  Study design. mg, milligramme; NE3107, bezisterim.

4
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
violations, if continued participation would not be in the 
best interest of the participant based on clinical findings 
or medical conditions, worsening of the disease, if the 
sponsor terminates the study, if the participant requests 
to be discontinued at any time, or participation in any 
other clinical trial. The reason for early discontinuation 
or withdrawal will be recorded, and participants will be 
asked to complete an early termination visit. Randomised 
participants who are withdrawn will not be replaced for 
any reason.
Study intervention and concomitant therapy
Randomised participants will receive either bezisterim 
20 mg capsules or matching oral placebo capsules to 
be taken twice daily. The first dose will be administered 
and observed on site during the BL visit (visit 2). Aside 
from the first dose, participants self-­administer the study 
intervention at home and treatment compliance will be 
assessed via bezisterim blood levels at visits 3, 4 and 5. 
Participants will be instructed to document the timing of 
their most recent dose prior to sample collection. Addi-
tionally, participants are provided with a treatment diary 
Box 1  Key inclusion criteria
	
⇒Adult participants ≥18 to <70 years of age at screening.
	
⇒Long COVID with neurological symptoms as defined below:
a.	 Current symptoms of at least fatigue and neurocognitive im-
pairment that began or worsened after an index SARS-­CoV-­2 
infection that occurred at least 3 months prior to screening. 
Index SARS-­CoV-­2 infection is defined as either (1) an episode 
of COVID-­19 with a positive nucleic acid or antigen test during 
acute illness, as documented in the medical record, or (2) a doc-
umented clinical diagnosis of COVID-­19, which can be based on 
a patient-­reported positive test for COVID-­19.
b.	 Symptoms cannot be explained by any concomitant condition or 
diagnosis, in the opinion of the investigator.
c.	 Symptom duration of at least 3 months.
	
⇒PROMIS Cognitive Function SF-­8a T-­score ≤40 (≥1 SD worse than 
normative mean).*
	
⇒PROMIS Fatigue SF-­13a T-­score ≥50 (worse than normative mean).*
	
⇒Willing and able to provide consent; participate in the planned study 
activities; allow the collection of blood for haematology, chemistry, 
metabolic tests, biomarkers of inflammation and neurodegenera-
tion, DNA methylation analysis, and bezisterim drug level determi-
nation; and provide urine for urinalysis and drug screening.
	
⇒Agree to maintain any other regular medications at current doses for 
the duration of the trial.
	
⇒For females taking hormone replacement therapy: the regimen must 
be stable for ≥6 months prior to randomisation and maintained 
throughout the 12-­week treatment period.
	
⇒Males and females with childbearing potential must agree to an ef-
fective method of contraception, such as a barrier method.
	
⇒Native-­level English proficiency.
*PROMIS Fatigue scores are scaled such that higher T-­scores indicate greater 
fatigue severity, whereas PROMIS Cognitive Function scores are scaled such 
that lower T-­scores indicate worse cognitive performance. Thresholds were 
selected consistent with established normative interpretations.
PROMIS, Patient-­Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System; SF, 
Short Form.
Box 2  Key exclusion criteria
	
⇒Positive SARS-­CoV-­2 nucleic acid or rapid antigen test in the past 
28 days.
	
⇒Received a vaccination for COVID-­19 or influenza within 14 days of 
randomisation.
	
⇒Previous admission to the ICU for COVID-­19-­related symptoms and/
or intubated (ie, mechanical ventilation) for COVID-­19 care.
	
⇒Prior or active unstable or progressive major psychiatric or neuro-
logic condition that may impact the ability to determine whether 
treatment effect is related to SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, including but 
not limited to the following:
a.	 Progressive neurodegenerative disease.
b.	 Past traumatic brain injury still associated with active post-­
concussive symptoms.
c.	 History of epilepsy or seizure disorder requiring ongoing 
treatment.
d.	 Post-­stroke deficits that may interfere with assessments.
e.	 Formal thought disorders.
f.	 Any uncontrolled neuropsychiatric or neurologic disorder.
g.	 Functional neurologic disorder.
h.	 MDD not on stable treatment for at least 3 months prior to 
screening and not planning to stay on a stable dose through 
the study, or a PHQ-­2 score ≥3. (If the PHQ-­2 score is ≥3 the 
investigator should discuss with the Study Medical Monitor to 
confirm eligibility).
i.	 PMDD.
	
⇒In the opinion of the investigator, any physical, cognitive (eg, intel-
lectual disability, dementia), or language impairments.
	
⇒Diagnosed reading disability or dyslexia.
	
⇒Documented ADHD being treated with psychostimulants. Individuals 
diagnosed with ADHD being treated with non-­stimulants must be 
stable on the current dosage for ≥3 months prior to randomisation 
and expected to remain stable throughout participation in the study.
	
⇒Known active bacterial, fungal, viral or other infection besides SARS-­
CoV-­2 requiring treatment within 28 days prior to randomisation and 
meeting criteria for systemic involvement.
	
⇒Diagnosis of narcolepsy.
	
⇒History of obstructive sleep apnoea unless the participant is com-
pliant with prescribed treatment (eg, CPAP or BiPAP therapy) as 
confirmed by medical records or clinician assessment. History of 
congestive heart failure, among other cardiac disorders.
	
⇒Clinically significant ECG findings.
	
⇒History of moderate or severe COPD or moderate or severe asthma.
	
⇒History of CFS, fibromyalgia or POTS prior to index COVID-­19 
infection.
	
⇒Seropositive for Lyme disease or syphilis.
	
⇒History of HIV, chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis C.
	
⇒Screening lab abnormalities that may cause fatigue or cognitive 
impairment.
	
⇒Has exclusionary values at screening for ALT, Hb, INR, creatinine 
clearance or untreated diabetes (HbA1c >9.0).
	
⇒Pregnant or lactating.
	
⇒History of any illness, including cancer, requiring systemic therapy 
within the last 5 years.
	
⇒Recent history of thromboembolic events within past 6 months.
	
⇒History of alcohol use disorder or substance use disorder within 12 
months of screening.
	
⇒History of active suicidal thoughts within 6 months of screening or a 
suicide attempt within the previous 2 years.
	
⇒Lifetime history of breast cancer.
Continued

5
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
to log missed doses and are instructed to bring the diary 
to visits for verification by the study staff. Dose modifi-
cation is not anticipated for this study. Any medication 
or vaccine, including over-­the-­counter or prescription 
medicines, recreational drugs, vitamins and/or herbal 
supplements, that the participant is receiving at the time 
of enrolment or during the study will be recorded with 
all relevant information. Participants are permitted to 
continue allowable pretrial medications during the study 
if the dose has been stable for ≥3 months prior to the 
screening visit (visit 1) and there are no planned changes 
in dose to occur during the study.
The 
following 
medications 
will 
be 
prohibited 
throughout the duration of the study: D2 receptor antag-
onists with exceptions, stimulants, systemic or intra-­
articular steroids, immunomodulators, vaccinations for 
COVID-­19 or influenza, amantadine and other N-­methyl-­
D-­aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists and potent 
CYP3A4 inhibitors. The following restrictions will also 
apply during the study: sedating medications, alcohol 
and cannabis-­containing products must be withheld for a 
minimum of 12 hours prior to assessments; nicotine prod-
ucts must be withheld within 4 hours of the visit.
Study endpoints and assessments
This study aims to explore the effect of bezisterim on 
cognitive function, fatigue, sleep and post-­exertional 
malaise (PEM; table 1). As a signal-­seeking, exploratory 
phase 2 trial, the primary outcome is intended for esti-
mation and hypothesis generation rather than formal 
hypothesis testing. As such, all efficacy endpoints will 
be tested independently without multiplicity adjust-
ment. While change from BL (visit 2) over time will be 
measured throughout the 12-­week treatment period, the 
change at week 12 (visit 5) will serve as the pre-­specified 
timepoint for all outcomes. To determine the effect of 
bezisterim on cognitive deficits associated with long 
COVID, patients will complete the Cogstate Cognition 
Battery, which will assess 6 areas of cognitive function, 
including psychomotor function, attention, sustained 
attention, processing speed, verbal learning and verbal 
memory. Additional cognitive assessments will include 
the PROMIS Cognitive Function SF-­8a, an 8-­item patient-­
reported questionnaire. Clinical outcomes related to 
fatigue, sleep and PEM will be assessed through the 
13-­item PROMIS Fatigue SF-­13a score, 8-­item PROMIS 
Sleep Disturbance SF-­8a score and the 10-­item DePaul 
Symptom Questionnaire–Post-­exertional Malaise score, 
respectively. To evaluate the quality of life, functional 
health and well-­being, the change in 12-­item Short Form 
Health Survey (SF-­12) total and domain scores will be 
assessed. The effect of bezisterim on the participant’s 
global impression of severity and change will be evaluated 
through assessing the change in overall and symptom-­
specific (Fatigue and Think Clearly) Patient’s Global 
Impression of Severity (PGI-­S) and Impression of Change 
(PGI-­C). Similarly, the clinician’s perspective on global 
impression of severity and change will be evaluated using 
the Clinician’s Global Impression of Severity (CGI-­S) 
and Impression of Change (CGI-­C) questionnaires. 
The three-­item Long COVID Other Burdensome Symp-
toms Questionnaire will be used to measure the partici-
pant’s severity and frequency of headache, tinnitus and 
decreased appetite symptoms. Participants will be asked 
to report on the occurrence of long COVID fatigue and 
neurocognitive symptom ‘crises’, ‘crashes’ or ‘exacerba-
tions’ occurring within the 4-­week interval prior to the BL 
visit and during each interval between subsequent visits. 
The number of reported events and estimated duration 
and severity (5-­point Likert scale) will be recorded. The 
Box 2  Continued
	
⇒Unwilling to not begin, resume or increase the dose of any form of 
cognitive training or cognitive-­enhancing supplement.
	
⇒Unwilling to refrain from the use of prohibited medications.
	
⇒Evidence or suspicion of autoimmune diseases commonly associ-
ated with pulmonary involvement and likely to require treatment.
	
⇒Requirement of supplemental oxygen at the time of screening, un-
less on a stable supplemental oxygen requirement ≥3 months prior 
to screening.
	
⇒Received investigational agents within 30 days prior to screening.
	
⇒Received a direct-­acting antiviral agent for COVID-­19 infection with-
in the past 2 weeks or TNF inhibitors within the 90 days prior to 
screening.
	
⇒Received systemic or intra-­articular steroids within 28 days prior 
to randomisation. An oral corticosteroid regimen of no more than 
7 days is allowed within 28 days prior to randomisation. Allowable 
regimens can be a tapered regimen or, if a tapered regimen is not 
required, a regimen where single daily doses do not exceed 20 mg/
day.
	
⇒Autoimmune diseases are exclusionary only if the participant is re-
ceiving or likely to require initiation of immunomodulatory treatment 
that would confound the interpretation of the study data during their 
participation in this study.
	
⇒Participants taking naltrexone at a dose >4.5 mg/day. Participants 
on a dose of ≤4.5 mg/day must be stable on the current dosage for 
≥3 months prior to randomisation and expected to remain stable 
throughout participation in the study.
	
⇒Use of or requirement for potent CYP3A4 inhibitors — including 
clarithromycin, erythromycin, diltiazem, itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
ritonavir or verapamil within 14 days of randomisation or within 5 
half-­lives of the drug, whichever is shorter, to avoid potential drug 
interaction through this metabolic pathway.
	
⇒Any medical intervention, including surgery, planned to occur during 
the study.
	
⇒Participants who are relatives of the sponsor or sponsor 
representatives.
ADHD, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder; ALT, alanine aminotrans-
ferase; BiPAP, bilevel positive airway pressure; CFS, chronic fatigue syn-
drome; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPAP, continuous 
positive airway pressure; CYP, cytochrome P450; ECG, electrocardio-
gram; Hb, haemoglobin; HbA1c, glycated Hb; ICU, intensive care unit; 
INR, international normalised ratio; MDD, major depressive disorder; 
PHQ-­2, Patient Health Questionnaire-­2; PMDD, premenstrual dysphoric 
disorder; POTS, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome; TNF, tumour 
necrosis factor.

6
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
Table 1  Objectives and endpoints
Objectives
Endpoints*
Efficacy
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on cognitive function 
(psychomotor function, attention, sustained attention, 
verbal learning and processing speed)
	
►Change in performance on the Cogstate Cognition Battery
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on psychomotor function
	
►Change in Detection test score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on attention
	
►Change in Identification test score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on sustained attention
	
►Change in Sustained Attention to Response test score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on processing speed
	
►Change in Digital Symbol Substitution test score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on verbal learning
	
►Change in International Shopping List test score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on verbal memory
	
►Change in International Shopping List Recall test score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on patient-­reported 
perceived cognition deficits
	
►Change in PROMIS Cognitive Function SF-­8a score
	
►Evaluate the proportion of participants with a clinically 
meaningful improvement in cognition
	
►Proportion of participants with an improvement of ≥0.5 SD 
in the Cogstate Cognition Battery score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on fatigue
	
►Change in PROMIS Fatigue SF-­13a score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on sleep
	
►Change in PROMIS Sleep Disturbance SF-­8a score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on post-­exertional malaise
	
►Change in DSQ-­PEM score
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on quality of life, functional 
health and well-­being
	
►Change in the SF-­12 total and domain scores
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on participant’s global 
impression of severity and change in symptoms
	
►Change in overall and symptom-­specific (Fatigue and Think 
Clearly) PGI-­S and PGI-­C
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on participant’s impression 
of severity and frequency of other long COVID symptoms
	
►Change in participant’s perception of severity and 
frequency of other burdensome long COVID symptoms 
(headache, tinnitus and decreased appetite)
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on participant’s reported 
incidence, severity and duration of long COVID fatigue and 
neurocognitive symptom exacerbations
	
►Change in participant’s reported incidence, severity and 
duration of symptoms on the long COVID fatigue and 
neurocognitive symptom exacerbation
	
►Evaluate the effect of bezisterim on clinician’s global 
impression of severity and change in symptoms
	
►Change in CGI-­S and CGI-­C
Exploratory
	
►Assess the effect of bezisterim on inflammatory biomarkers
	
►Change in plasma biomarkers of inflammation/immunity 
over 12 weeks
	
►Assess the effect of bezisterim on biomarkers related to 
neurodegeneration and metabolic dysfunction
	
►Change in plasma biomarkers of neurodegeneration and 
metabolic dysfunction over 12 weeks
	
►Assess the effect of bezisterim on biological age
	
►Change in DNA methylation over 12 weeks
Safety
	
►Assess the safety and tolerability of bezisterim
	
►Incidence and severity of TEAEs
	
►Incidence of clinically significant changes in vital signs 
(blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate and temperature)
	
►Incidence of clinically significant changes in physical 
examinations
	
►Incidence of clinically significant changes in 12-­lead ECGs
	
►Incidence of clinically significant changes in clinical 
laboratory assessments (haematology, chemistry and 
urinalysis)
*Evaluated at V5 (EOT; week 12).
CGI-­C, Clinician’s Global Impression of Change; CGI-­S, Clinician’s Global Impression of Severity; DSQ-­PEM, DePaul Symptom 
Questionnaire–Post-­exertional Malaise; ECG, electrocardiogram; EOT, end of treatment; PGI-­C, Patient’s Global Impression of Change; 
PGI-­S, Patient’s Global Impression of Severity; PROMIS, Patient-­Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System; SF, Short Form; SF-­
12, 12-­Item SF Health Survey; TEAE, treatment-­emergent adverse event; V, visit.

7
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
PHQ-­2, Epworth Sleepiness Scale and C-­SSRS Baseline/
Screening will be administered at visit 1 to determine 
eligibility criteria. Following the initial screening period 
(visit 1), the C-­SSRS since last visit will be administered at 
visits 2–5 for continued monitoring.
Exploratory endpoints include the effects of bezis-
terim on inflammatory biomarkers and other biomarkers 
related to neurodegeneration and metabolic dysfunc-
tion as assessed by blood and plasma samples collected 
throughout the study period. Blood samples for DNA 
methylation and RNA expression analyses, and plasma 
samples for biomarkers of inflammation and neurode-
generation, will be collected and assessed at each visit 
during the intervention period to enhance the under-
standing of the biological underpinnings of neurological 
symptoms associated with long COVID. Blood samples 
for bezisterim drug level determination will be collected 
and assessed at visits 3–5 (online supplemental exhibit 
1; online supplemental table S1). Participants are made 
fully aware of the number, purpose and timing of blood 
collections, which are minimal in sampling volume and 
frequency while still allowing for assessment of pharma-
cokinetics (PK) and exploratory objectives. Additionally, 
sampling is aligned with scheduled study visits to avoid 
additional visit burden.
The incidence and severity of treatment-­emergent 
adverse events (TEAEs) will be identified through safety 
assessments (table  1) that will be performed during 
scheduled visits (online supplemental exhibit 1). Any 
clinically significant changes occurring during the study, 
including clinically significant changes in vital signs, phys-
ical examinations, electrocardiograms and clinical labo-
ratory assessments, will be recorded as an adverse event 
(AE). The clinical laboratory tests will include assess-
ments of haematology, chemistry and urinalysis (table 2). 
All clinical laboratory tests with values considered signifi-
cantly abnormal during the study will be repeated until 
the values are no longer considered clinically significant 
by the investigator. The study may be discontinued at 
the discretion of the sponsor or the sponsor’s medical 
monitor/investigator based on increased frequency, 
severity and/or duration of known AEs or any other 
concerns regarding safety.
Blood samples will be collected to evaluate trough 
levels of bezisterim and dosing compliance, with instruc-
tions to document timing of the most recent dose prior 
to sample collection. Whole blood will be analysed for 
DNA methylation and RNA expression and then stored 
frozen; no gene sequencing will be conducted. Plasma 
samples will assess levels of biomarkers of inflammation, 
Table 2  Clinical laboratory tests
Haematology
RBC count, Hb, HCT, platelet count (absolute), WBC count with differential, coagulation (INR, PT and PTT)
Chemistry
Sodium, potassium, chloride, GGT, ALT, AST, albumin, ALP, urea, calcium,* creatinine, total bilirubin, hs-­CRP, 
blood glucose, amylase, lipase, HDL, LDL, LDH, triglycerides, VLDL, total cholesterol
Metabolic
HbA1c
Urinalysis
pH, specific gravity, protein, glucose, ketones, bilirubin, nitrite, urobilinogen, leucocyte esterase†
UDS
A commercially available kit will be used to screen for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, 
cocaine and metabolites, methadone, methamphetamines, MDMA, opiates, oxycodone, phencyclidine, and 
cannabinoids (THC)‡
Pregnancy
hCG§
FSH*
FSH (post-­menopausal women only)
Thyroid*
TSH, Free T4
Autoimmunity ANA¶
*Assessed at screening only.
†If urinalysis is positive for protein, blood, nitrite and/or leucocyte esterase, a microscopic examination (for RBCs, WBCs, bacteria, casts and 
epithelial cells) will be performed.
‡If screening UDS reports only the presence of THC, confirmatory testing by the central lab will not be required.
§Childbearing potential is defined as a premenopausal female capable of becoming pregnant. This includes women using oral, injectable or 
mechanical contraception; women who are single; and women whose husbands have been vasectomised or whose husbands have received 
or are using mechanical contraceptive devices. Women who have been surgically sterile for at least 6 months or who are postmenopausal 
(no menstrual bleeding for at least 1 year) will not be considered to be of childbearing potential. A serum pregnancy test will be performed on 
participants of childbearing potential at screening. A urine/dipstick pregnancy test will be performed at all subsequent visits; participants who 
test positive will be referred for care as per state and institutional practice guidelines.
¶Evaluated at V2 (BL; day 1) and V5 (EOT; week 12) only.
ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; ANA, antinuclear antibody; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BL, baseline; 
EOT, end of treatment; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone; GGT, gamma-­glutamyl transpeptidase; Hb, haemoglobin; HbA1c, glycated Hb; 
hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; HCT, haematocrit; HDL, high-­density lipoprotein; hs-­CRP, high-­sensitivity C-­reactive protein; INR, 
international normalised ratio; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LDL, low-­density lipoprotein; MDMA, 3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine; PT, 
prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; RBC, red blood cell; THC, tetrahydrocannabinol; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; UDS, 
urine drug screen; V, visit; VLDL, very low-­density lipoprotein; WBC, white blood cell.

8
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
which may include C1q, interferon-­gamma (IFN-γ), 
IL-­1β, IL-­6, IL-­17, IL-­23, TNF, cytokine regulated on acti-
vation, normal T-­cell expressed and secreted, and mono-
cyte chemoattractant protein-­1 and neuroinflammation/ 
neurodegeneration (phospho-­tau, neurofilament light, 
glial fibrillar acidic proteins, amyloid beta42/beta40). 
Antinuclear antibodies will be collected at visit 2 and visit 
5 only. If multiple assessments requiring blood samples 
and safety laboratory assessments are to be evaluated at 
the same time, a single blood sample may be collected 
and aliquoted as appropriate to allow the specific analyses 
to be performed (online supplemental exhibit 1; online 
supplemental table S1).
Data will be analysed as specified in the statistical analysis 
plan. The analysis populations will include the following: 
(1) the modified intention-­to-­treat (mITT) population, 
defined as all participants who received at least one dose 
of the study intervention and had at least one post-­BL 
efficacy measurement; (2) the per-­protocol population, 
defined as all participants in the mITT population who 
had no important protocol deviations affecting efficacy 
and safety assessments; and (3) the safety population, 
defined as all participants who received at least 1 dose 
of the study intervention. Any non-­compliance with the 
clinical trial protocol and associated documents on the 
part of the participant, the investigator, and/or the study 
site staff is considered a protocol deviation. Corrective 
actions for deviations are to be developed by the site and 
implemented promptly. The mITT population will be 
used for analysis of the safety measures, unless otherwise 
specified. BL information will include measurements of 
demographic and clinical characteristics of participants 
collected before the first administration of study inter-
vention, and on-­treatment (ie, longitudinal) data are 
collected thereafter until discharge and 4-­week follow-­up. 
The primary analysis model to assess change from BL at 
week 12 for all efficacy endpoints will be a mixed model 
for repeated measures using restricted maximum likeli-
hood in the mITT population with treatment, visit and 
treatment-­by-­visit as fixed effects; BL score as a covariate; 
and participants as a random effect. The secondary anal-
ysis for the efficacy endpoints will be an analysis of cova-
riance, where missing endpoints will be imputed with 
the last (post-­BL) observation carried forward. Sensitivity 
analysis to explain the impact of different assumptions on 
missingness will be conducted, that is, missing at random 
and missing not at random.
Summary statistics will be provided for TEAEs, serious 
AEs (SAEs) and study discontinuation due to AEs of 
death. Counts and proportions of participants experi-
encing AEs will be reported for each treatment group.
Exploratory analyses will be conducted to investigate 
potential correlations between clinical outcomes and 
a range of biological markers. These analyses aim to 
generate hypotheses and provide mechanistic insights 
that may inform future studies and therapeutic strat-
egies. Specifically, we intend to support identified 
candidate biomarkers for future validation by evaluating 
the following:
	
►Correlations between BL biomarker levels and treat-
ment response, including inflammatory cytokines 
(eg, IL-­6, TNF-α, IL-­1β), neurodegenerative markers 
(eg, phospho-­tau, amyloid beta42/40), and metabolic 
indicators.
	
►Longitudinal changes in biomarker profiles and their 
associations with symptom improvement, as meas-
ured by validated clinical scales and patient-­reported 
outcomes.
	
►Biomarker signatures predictive of responder status, 
using stratified analyses based on symptom duration, 
severity, and cognitive function.
	
►Exploratory subgroup analyses to assess whether 
specific biomarker patterns are associated with differ-
ential treatment effects across demographic or clin-
ical subgroups.
	
►Multivariate modelling to identify potential inter-
actions between biomarkers and clinical endpoints, 
adjusting for relevant covariates.
Sample size considerations
As a proof-­of-­concept study, efficacy endpoints will be eval-
uated independently, and no multiplicity adjustment has 
been applied in the sample size determination. Assuming 
approximately 81 participants per treatment arm 
complete the week 12 assessment, the study is powered 
at 80% (two-­sided α=0.05) to detect a between-­group 
difference of approximately 0.4 SD units in the mean 
change from BL to week 12 in Cogstate domain scores or 
PROMIS measures. For PROMIS instruments, this corre-
sponds to approximately 4 T-­score points (SD=10). The 
sample size assumptions are based on an anticipated SD 
of approximately 9; notably, in RECOVER-­NEURO, the 
SD for mean change in the PROMIS Cognitive Function 
SF-­8a score in the active comparator arm was estimated at 
7.4 (derived from a 95% CI; n=61), supporting the plausi-
bility of this assumption.48
At present, there is no universally established mini-
mally important difference (MID) for PROMIS measures 
in long COVID populations. However, a difference of 0.4 
SD (approximately 4 T-­score points) is consistent with 
published MID ranges for PROMIS domains in other 
clinical contexts and represents a small-­to-­moderate treat-
ment effect. This threshold is also broadly aligned with 
assumptions used in contemporaneous long COVID trials; 
for example, the RECOVER-­SLEEP protocol defines a 
clinically meaningful treatment effect as a 5-­point change 
in PROMIS T-­scores.49
Under these assumptions, the study is expected to 
have sufficient sensitivity to detect clinically meaningful 
directional signals between bezisterim and placebo over 
12 weeks of treatment, although the trial is exploratory 
and not designed for confirmatory hypothesis testing.

9
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
Data generation, analysis, management and retention
Clinical data, including AEs and concomitant medica-
tions, and other data (eg, clinical laboratory data) will 
be entered into an electronic data capture system that 
complies with regional and national regulatory standards 
and is 21 CFR Part 11 compliant. The data system will 
require password protection, and internal quality checks 
will be performed to identify inconsistencies. Sites will be 
trained to maintain accuracy, completeness, legibility and 
timeliness of reported data. A data management plan will 
also be prepared, including detailed data management 
activities and quality assurance. Investigators will maintain 
confidentiality for all study documentation and will take 
measures to prevent accidental or premature destruction 
of these documents. The investigators, investigational 
sites and institutional review board (IRB)/independent 
ethics committee agree to retain study-­related docu-
ments in a secure location for at least 2 years after the 
last approval of a marketing application following formal 
discontinuation of the investigational product.
Ethics and dissemination
The protocol, informed consent form (ICF), investiga-
tor’s brochure and other relevant documents (eg, adver-
tisements) will be submitted to an IRB by the investigator 
to be reviewed and approved before the initiation of the 
study. The investigator will provide written summaries 
of the status of the study to the IRB at least annually in 
accordance with the requirements, policies and proce-
dures established. Additionally, the investigator will notify 
the IRB of SAEs and other significant safety findings, as 
required. The study protocol has received central IRB 
approval (Advarra #Pro00081088).
This study will be conducted in accordance with the 
protocol and the consensus ethical principle as derived 
from the Declaration of Helsinki and Council for Inter-
national Organizations of Medical Sciences International 
Ethical Guidelines, applicable International Council for 
Harmonization (ICH) Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and 
applicable laws and regulations.
A clinical research organisation has been contracted by 
the sponsor to oversee the conduct of the trial per GCP 
regulations and thus is not independent of the sponsor. 
Likewise, the statistical analysis plan, database access 
and programming are being managed by a statistical 
consulting company contracted by the sponsor. Consent 
forms describing the study intervention, study proce-
dures and risks will be given to each potential participant 
to provide an explanation of the nature and purpose of 
the study. Potential participants will have the opportunity 
to review the written ICF, discuss with their families and 
ask questions as needed prior to signing the document. 
Written documentation of informed consent (paper or 
electronic) will be obtained from each participant prior 
to starting the study. Strict participant confidentiality and 
privacy will be observed by the participating investigators, 
their staff and the sponsor. Biological samples, genetic 
testing and clinical information related to participants 
will be confidential and will not be released to any unau-
thorised third party without prior written approval from 
the sponsor. The site monitor, authorised representatives 
of the sponsor and representatives of the IRB or regu-
latory agency may inspect all relevant documents and 
records that are required to be maintained by the investi-
gator, including medical and pharmacy records.
The sponsor will maintain confidentiality standards by 
assigning a unique study-­specific number to each partic-
ipant enrolled in the study. The contact information for 
study participants will be securely stored at each clinical 
site for internal use during the study. Data generated by 
this study will be available upon request by representatives 
of national and local health authorities, the sponsor (or its 
designee) and the IRB for each study site, as appropriate. 
Each clinical site will be responsible for internal quality 
management of study conduct, data, biological specimen 
collection, documentation and completion based on its 
internal processes. Following written standard operating 
procedures and the clinical monitoring plan, site moni-
tors will verify that biological specimens are collected in 
compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP and applicable 
regulatory requirements (eg, Good Laboratory Practices 
and Good Manufacturing Practices).
Data collected from participants are intended for use 
only by the study sponsor, investigators and designated 
study collaborators for the purposes of conducting and 
evaluating the clinical trial and related regulatory submis-
sions. Following peer-­review/publication of the primary 
study results, access to the aggregate data, study protocol 
and statistical analysis plan will be considered for meth-
odologically sound proposals upon reasonable request. 
Data sharing will be conducted in a manner that protects 
participant privacy, maintains compliance with applicable 
regulations and safeguards proprietary and confidential 
information. Data will be shared with lead study investiga-
tors, patient advisors and the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration. Final interpretation of the data will be made in 
collaboration with the sponsor under the direction of the 
Chief Medical Officer.
DISCUSSION
There is an urgent unmet need for treatments that 
reduce the burden of cognitive impairment and fatigue 
in long COVID. Despite intensive global research efforts, 
multiple interventional studies have failed to demon-
strate clinical benefit in long COVID, including the much 
anticipated National Institutes of Health-­sponsored inter-
ventional study RECOVER-­NEURO, which did not meet 
its primary endpoint, modified Everyday Cognition Scale 
2.48 50 51 These findings underscore the complexity of long 
COVID pathophysiology and the challenges inherent in 
demonstrating treatment effects in heterogeneous popu-
lations using predominantly PROs.
Previous studies have shown the activity of low-­dose 
naltrexone (LDN) on a wide range of off-­label uses for 
inflammation and pain, specifically through its activity 

10
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
against non-­opioid receptors (eg, TLR4 receptors). In a 
cohort study, Bonilla et al indicated that participants who 
received LDN off-­label for PASC self-­reported improve-
ments in fatigue, sleep patterns and functional status 
believed to be due to its anti-­inflammatory and immuno-
modulatory effects, possibly warranting clinical trials.52 A 
phase 2, randomised, double-­blind, placebo-­controlled 
study has completed recruiting participants to determine 
if LDN reduces fatigue, inflammatory markers and symp-
toms related to PASC (NCT05430152).53
Bezisterim has been previously evaluated for cogni-
tive conditions, such as PD and AD, and was considered 
well tolerated with no SAEs associated with the study 
treatment.42 Our current understanding of long COVID 
pathophysiology suggests the need for a therapy that 
targets multiple mechanisms of disease. Due to its mode 
of action, bezisterim may decrease the need for multiple 
medications, potentially providing an alternative to other 
currently investigated therapies that may only address 
one underlying mechanism of disease, such as reducing 
viral reservoir.
This is the first study evaluating the impact of bezis-
terim on cognitive and neurological symptoms associated 
with long COVID. The randomised, triple-­blind, placebo-­
controlled study design minimises bias and expectation 
effects, which is particularly important in trials that 
include subjective outcomes. Additionally, to increase 
the likelihood of signal detection, participant selection is 
enriched for subjective cognitive dysfunction and subjec-
tive fatigue.
Ideally, clinical trials in long COVID should incorporate 
a decentralised or hybrid design to minimise participant 
burden, as the condition is often associated with severe 
fatigue, cognitive dysfunction and limited functional 
capacity that can make travel to study sites challenging. 
Decentralised approaches have the advantage of reducing 
logistical barriers and improving access and participation 
by allowing study activities to be conducted in the patient’s 
home environment. However, for a signal-­seeking phase 
2 study in which efficacy is primarily assessed through 
PROs, the reliability, consistency and interpretability of 
these subjective measures are critical. As PROs are inher-
ently dependent on patient perception, they are sensitive 
to variability in administration conditions, timing and 
understanding of the measurement tool. Accordingly, 
administration of key PRO assessments in a controlled, 
site-­based environment was prioritised in this study to 
reduce variability, ensure standardised instructions and 
optimise data quality for early efficacy assessment. While 
on-­site visits may impose a burden on participants with 
long COVID, the protocol was designed to minimise this 
burden by limiting study procedures to those essential 
for interpretation of treatment effect. Specifically, PRO 
assessments were restricted to a core set of clinically 
meaningful instruments, and blood sampling and ancil-
lary evaluations were limited to timepoints and measures 
necessary to support interpretation of clinical and mecha-
nistic outcomes. This design reflects a deliberate balance 
between minimising participant burden and preserving 
the methodological rigour required to detect a mean-
ingful signal in a heterogeneous and poorly characterised 
condition.
Several limitations of the trial design should be consid-
ered. The absence of a validated biomarker for long 
COVID introduces diagnostic uncertainty and poten-
tial heterogeneity, which may dilute treatment effects. 
Reliance on PROs to assess brain fog, fatigue and PEM 
increases susceptibility to placebo response and reporting 
variability. Additionally, the sample size and duration 
typical of phase 2 studies may limit the detection of 
smaller or longer-­term treatment effects.
In summary, this proof-­of-­concept study was designed 
to rigorously evaluate the safety and efficacy of bezisterim 
in long COVID. The design seeks to balance method-
ological rigour with the practical challenges inherent in 
this population. Findings are expected to inform future 
confirmatory studies and contribute to the development 
of treatments for long COVID.
Author affiliations
1BioVie, Carson City, Nevada, USA
2University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA
3Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA
4Patient-­Led Research Collaborative, Oakland, California, USA
5Perissos, Wake Forest, North Carolina, USA
6Biotechant Solutions LLC, Newtown, Pennsylvania, USA
Acknowledgements  Medical writing, editing and publication assistance were 
provided by p-­value communications and funded by BioVie Inc.
Contributors  PM, PMJ, SH-­YiC, LMcC, SO'Q, CR, CA, CMP, JY and JMP contributed 
to the conception and design of the clinical trial, drafted and revised the 
manuscript, and provided their final approval for publication. PM is the guarantor.
Funding  The study is funded through the Defense Health Agency, Congressionally 
Directed Medical Research Programs’ Peer-­Reviewed Medical Research Program 
under Award No. HT9425-­24-­1-­0113. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions and 
recommendations described in this publication are those of the study sponsor and 
are not necessarily endorsed by the Department of Defense.
Competing interests  PM, CR, CA and JY are employees and shareholders of 
BioVie Inc. MJP, LM, SOQ and CMP have received consulting fees from BioVie Inc. 
SH-­YC has received consulting fees from Grace Therapeutics. CMP is a consultant 
and an employee of Biotechant Solutions LLC. JMP is an employee of BioVie 
Inc., is a shareholder, has employee stock options, and has the following patents 
approved or pending: BVIE.020WO, BVIE.028PR. Unrelated to this submitted work, 
MJP has received consulting fees from Gilead Sciences, AstraZeneca, Apellis 
Pharmaceuticals and BioNTech, and research support from Aerium Therapeutics 
and Shionogi.
Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were involved in the 
design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to the 
Methods section for further details.
Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement  No data are available.
Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

11
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-­commercial. See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iD
Penelope Markham https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6412-676X
REFERENCES
	 1	 World Health Organization. A clinical case definition of post 
COVID-­19 condition by a Delphi consensus. 2021. Available: https://
www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-Post_COVID-19_​
condition-Clinical_case_definition-2021.1 [accessed 11 Feb 2026]
	 2	 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. A long 
COVID definition: a chronic, systemic disease state with profound 
consequences. Washington, DC The National Academies Press; 
2024. Available: https://doi.org/10.17226/27768 [accessed 11 Feb 
2026]
	 3	 Ely EW, Brown LM, Fineberg HV, et al. Long Covid Defined. N Engl J 
Med 2024;391:1746–53. 
	 4	 National Center for Health Statistics. Long COVID; household pulse 
survey, 2022-­2024. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/covid19/​
pulse/long-covid.htm [Accessed 11 Feb 2026].
	 5	 Al-­Aly Z, Davis H, McCorkell L, et al. Long COVID science, research 
and policy. Nat Med 2024;30:2148–64. 
	 6	 Adjaye-­Gbewonyo D, Vahratian A, Perrine CG, et al. Long COVID in 
Adults: United States, 2022. NCHS Data Brief 2023;480:1–8.
	 7	 Faghy MA, Wüst RCI, Altmann DM, et al. Current status and 
future perspectives on the mechanistic and pathophysiological 
understanding of long COVID. Commun Med (Lond) 2026;6:255. 
	 8	 Davis HE, Assaf GS, McCorkell L, et al. Characterizing long COVID 
in an international cohort: 7 months of symptoms and their impact. 
EClinicalMedicine 2021;38:101019. 
	 9	 eBioMedicine. Post-­COVID-­19 condition, brain fog, and fatigue-­what 
do we know now? EBioMedicine 2024;105:105252. 
	10	 Asadi-­Pooya AA, Akbari A, Emami A, et al. Long COVID syndrome-­
associated brain fog. J Med Virol 2022;94:979–84. 
	11	 Ali ST, Kang AK, Patel TR, et al. Evolution of neurologic symptoms 
in non-­hospitalized COVID-­19 “long haulers”. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 
2022;9:950–61. 
	12	 Tran V-­T, Porcher R, Pane I, et al. Course of post COVID-­19 disease 
symptoms over time in the ComPaRe long COVID prospective e-­
cohort. Nat Commun 2022;13:1812. 
	13	 Vernon SD, Zheng T, Do H, et al. Incidence and Prevalence 
of Post-­COVID-­19 Myalgic Encephalomyelitis: A Report from 
the Observational RECOVER-­Adult Study. J Gen Intern Med 
2025;40:1085–94. 
	14	 Dulal D, Maraey A, Elsharnoby H, et al. Impact of COVID-­19 
pandemic on the incidence and prevalence of postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes 
2025;11:698–704. 
	15	 Komaroff AL, Lipkin WI. ME/CFS and Long COVID share similar 
symptoms and biological abnormalities: road map to the literature. 
Front Med (Lausanne) 2023;10:1187163. 
	16	 Diekman S, Chung T. Post-­acute sequelae of SARS-­CoV-­2 syndrome 
presenting as postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. Clin Exp 
Emerg Med 2023;10:18–25. 
	17	 Mallick D, Goyal L, Chourasia P, et al. COVID-­19 Induced Postural 
Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS): A Review. Cureus 
2023;15:e36955. 
	18	 Marks DF. CONVERGING evidence of similar symptomatology of 
me/cfs and pasc indicating multisystemic dyshomeostasis. PsyArXiv 
[Preprint] 2023. 
	19	 Taylor K, Pearson M, Das S, et al. Genetic risk factors for severe 
and fatigue dominant long COVID and commonalities with ME/CFS 
identified by combinatorial analysis. J Transl Med 2023;21:775. 
	20	 Peluso MJ, Deeks SG. Mechanisms of long COVID and the path 
toward therapeutics. Cell 2024;187:5500–29. 
	21	 Schultheiß C, Willscher E, Paschold L, et al. The IL-­1β, IL-­6, and TNF 
cytokine triad is associated with post-­acute sequelae of COVID-­19. 
Cell Rep Med 2022;3:100663. 
	22	 Bourgognon JM, Cavanagh J. The role of cytokines in modulating 
learning and memory and brain plasticity. Brain Neurosci Adv 
2020;4:2398212820979802. 
	23	 Cheong J-­G, Ravishankar A, Sharma S, et al. Epigenetic memory of 
coronavirus infection in innate immune cells and their progenitors. 
Cell 2023;186:3882–902. 
	24	 Greene C, Connolly R, Brennan D, et al. Blood–brain barrier 
disruption and sustained systemic inflammation in individuals 
with long COVID-­associated cognitive impairment. Nat Neurosci 
2024;27:421–32. 
	25	 Clouston SAP, Vaska P, Babalola T, et al. Glial activation among 
individuals with neurological post-­acute sequelae of coronavirus 
disease 2019: A positron emission tomography study of brain fog 
using [18F]-FEPPA. Brain Behav Immun Health 2025;44:100945. 
	26	 VanElzakker MB, Bues HF, Brusaferri L, et al. Neuroinflammation 
in post-­acute sequelae of COVID-­19 (PASC) as assessed by [11C]
PBR28 PET correlates with vascular disease measures. Brain Behav 
Immun 2024;119:713–23. 
	27	 Rhea EM, Logsdon AF, Hansen KM, et al. The S1 protein of 
SARS-­CoV-­2 crosses the blood-­brain barrier in mice. Nat Neurosci 
2021;24:368–78. 
	28	 Rong Z, Mai H, Ebert G, et al. Persistence of spike protein at the 
skull-­meninges-­brain axis may contribute to the neurological 
sequelae of COVID-­19. Cell Host Microbe 2024;32:2112–30. 
	29	 Peluso MJ, Swank ZN, Goldberg SA, et al. Plasma-­based antigen 
persistence in the post-­acute phase of COVID-­19. Lancet Infect Dis 
2024;24:e345–7. 
	30	 Swank Z, Borberg E, Chen Y, et al. Measurement of circulating viral 
antigens post-­SARS-­CoV-­2 infection in a multicohort study. Clin 
Microbiol Infect 2024;30:1599–605. 
	31	 Swank Z, Senussi Y, Manickas-­Hill Z, et al. Persistent Circulating 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Spike Is 
Associated With Post-­acute Coronavirus Disease 2019 Sequelae. 
Clin Infect Dis 2023;76:e487–90. 
	32	 Sariol A, Perlman S. SARS-­CoV-­2 takes its Toll. Nat Immunol 
2021;22:801–2. 
	33	 Holms RD. Long COVID (PASC) Is Maintained by a Self-­Sustaining 
Pro-­Inflammatory TLR4/RAGE-­Loop of S100A8/A9 > TLR4/RAGE 
Signalling, Inducing Chronic Expression of IL-­1b, IL-­6 and TNFa: 
Anti-­Inflammatory Ezrin Peptides as Potential Therapy. Immuno 
2022;2:512–33. 
	34	 Fontes-­Dantas FL, Fernandes GG, Gutman EG, et al. SARS-­
CoV-­2 Spike protein induces TLR4-­mediated long-­term cognitive 
dysfunction recapitulating post-­COVID-­19 syndrome in mice. Cell 
Rep 2023;42:112189. 
	35	 Frank MG, Nguyen KH, Ball JB, et al. SARS-­CoV-­2 spike S1 subunit 
induces neuroinflammatory, microglial and behavioral sickness 
responses: Evidence of PAMP-­like properties. Brain Behav Immun 
2022;100:267–77. 
	36	 Khan S, Shafiei MS, Longoria C, et al. SARS-­CoV-­2 spike protein 
induces inflammation via TLR2-­dependent activation of the NF-κB 
pathway. Elife 2021;10:e68563. 
	37	 Jiang Q, Li G, Wang H, et al. SARS-­CoV-­2 spike S1 protein induces 
microglial NLRP3-­dependent neuroinflammation and cognitive 
impairment in mice. Exp Neurol 2025;383:115020. 
	38	 Reading CL, Yan J, Testa MA, et al. An exploratory analysis of 
bezisterim treatment associated with decreased biological age 
acceleration, and improved clinical measure and biomarker changes 
in mild-­to-­moderate probable Alzheimer’s disease. Front Neurosci 
2025;19:1516746. 
	39	 Lu M, Patsouris D, Li P, et al. A new antidiabetic compound 
attenuates inflammation and insulin resistance in Zucker diabetic 
fatty rats. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2010;298:E1036–48. 
	40	 Offner H, Firestein GS, Boyle DL, et al. An orally bioavailable 
synthetic analog of an active dehydroepiandrosterone metabolite 
reduces established disease in rodent models of rheumatoid arthritis. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2009;329:1100–9. 
	41	 Reading CL, Ahlem CN, Murphy MF. NM101 Phase III study of 
NE3107 in Alzheimer’s disease: rationale, design and therapeutic 
modulation of neuroinflammation and insulin resistance. 
Neurodegener Dis Manag 2021;11:289–98. 
	42	 Reading CL, Frincke JM, White SK. Molecular targets for 
17α-ethynyl-­5-­androstene-­3β,7β,17β-triol, an anti-­inflammatory 
agent derived from the human metabolome. PLoS One 
2012;7:e32147. 
	43	 Wang T, Villegas S, Huang Y, et al. Amelioration of glucose 
intolerance by the synthetic androstene HE3286: link to inflammatory 
pathways. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2010;333:70–80. 
	44	 Ahlem CN, Kennedy MR, Page TM, et al. Studies of the 
pharmacology of 17α-ethynyl-­androst-­5-­ene-­3β,7β,17β-triol, 
a synthetic anti-­inflammatory androstene. Int J Clin Exp Med 
2011;4:119–35.
	45	 Nicoletti F, Philippens I, Fagone P, et al. 17α-Ethynyl-­androst-­5-­ene-­
3β,7β,17β-triol (HE3286) Is Neuroprotective and Reduces Motor 
Impairment and Neuroinflammation in a Murine MPTP Model of 
Parkinson’s Disease. Parkinsons Dis 2012;2012:969418. 

12
Markham P, et al. BMJ Open 2026;16:e118726. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2026-118726
Open access
	46	 Lambert WS, Carlson BJ, Formichella CR, et al. Oral Delivery of a 
Synthetic Sterol Reduces Axonopathy and Inflammation in a Rodent 
Model of Glaucoma. Front Neurosci 2017;11:45. 
	47	 Khan RS, Dine K, Luna E, et al. HE3286 reduces axonal loss and 
preserves retinal ganglion cell function in experimental optic neuritis. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:5744–51. 
	48	 Knopman DS, Koltai D, Laskowitz DT, et al. Evaluation of 
Interventions for Cognitive Symptoms in Long COVID: A Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol 2026;83:49–59. 
	49	 Duke University. RECOVER‑SLEEP: a platform protocol for 
evaluation of interventions for sleep disturbances in post‑acute 
sequelae of SARS‑CoV‑2 infection (PASC). Available: https://​
clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06404086 [Accessed 18 May 2026].
	50	 McIntyre RS, Phan L, Kwan ATH, et al. Vortioxetine for the treatment 
of post-­COVID-­19 condition: a randomized controlled trial. Brain 
2024;147:849–57. 
	51	 Geng LN, Bonilla H, Hedlin H, et al. Nirmatrelvir-­Ritonavir and 
Symptoms in Adults With Postacute Sequelae of SARS-­CoV-­2 
Infection: The STOP-­PASC Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med 
2024;184:1024–34. 
	52	 Bonilla H, Tian L, Marconi VC, et al. Low-­dose naltrexone use 
for the management of post-­acute sequelae of COVID-­19. Int 
Immunopharmacol 2023;124:110966. 
	53	 Low-­dose naltrexone for post-­COVID fatigue syndrome. 
NCT05430152. Available: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/​
NCT05430152 [Accessed 18 May 2026].
