AI-driven multi-omics modeling of myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome
Ruoyun Xiong1,2,3, Elizabeth Aiken3, Ryan Caldwell3, Suzanne D. Vernon4, Lina Kozhaya3, 
Courtney Gunter2,3, Lucinda Bateman4, Derya Unutmaz3, Julia Oh1,3,✉
1Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
2The University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA.
3The Jackson Laboratory, Farmington, CT, USA.
4Bateman Horne Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Abstract
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a chronic illness with a 
multifactorial etiology and heterogeneous symptomatology, posing major challenges for diagnosis 
and treatment. Here we present BioMapAI, a supervised deep neural network trained on a 4-year, 
longitudinal, multi-omics dataset from 249 participants, which integrates gut metagenomics, 
plasma metabolomics, immune cell profiling, blood laboratory data and detailed clinical 
symptoms. By simultaneously modeling these diverse data types to predict clinical severity, 
BioMapAI identifies disease- and symptom-specific biomarkers and classifies ME/CFS in both 
held-out and independent external cohorts. Using an explainable AI approach, we construct a 
unique connectivity map spanning the microbiome, immune system and plasma metabolome 
in health and ME/CFS adjusted for age, gender and additional clinical factors. This map 
uncovers altered associations between microbial metabolism (for example, short-chain fatty 
acids, branched-chain amino acids, tryptophan, benzoate), plasma lipids and bile acids, and 
heightened inflammatory responses in mucosal and inflammatory T cell subsets (MAIT, γδT) 
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
✉Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Julia Oh. julia.oh@duke.edu.
Author contributions
Conceptualization was carried out by D.U., J.O., S.D.V., L.B. and R.X. Data curation was performed by R.X., C.G., S.D.V. and L.B. 
Formal analysis was conducted by R.X. Funding acquisition was secured by D.U., J.O., S.D.V. and L.B. Clinical sample design and 
collection were conducted by S.D.V. and L.B. Investigation was carried out by R.X., C.G., E.A., S.D.V., L.B., R.C. and L.K. Project 
administration was handled by J.O., D.U., L.B., S.D.V. and C.G. Resources were provided by D.U., J.O., S.D.V. and L.B. Supervision 
was provided by J.O. Visualization and writing were completed by R.X. and J.O. Writing, review and editing were performed by R.X., 
C.G., S.D.V., L.B., D.U. and J.O.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code 
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-03788-3.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Competing interests
S.D.V. is affiliated and has a financial interest with The BioCollective, a company that provided the BioCollector, the collection kit 
used for at-home stool collection discussed in this paper. The other authors declare no competing interests.
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-03788-3.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2025 September ; 31(9): 2991–3001. doi:10.1038/s41591-025-03788-3.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

secreting IFN-γ and GzA. Overall, BioMapAI provides unprecedented systems-level insights into 
ME/CFS, refining existing hypotheses and hypothesizing unique mechanisms—specifically, how 
multi-omics dynamics are associated to the disease’s heterogeneous symptoms.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a debilitating, 
multisystem illness that often persists for years or even decades and presents with substantial 
heterogeneity in clinical manifestations. Affecting more than 10 million individuals 
worldwide, ME/CFS is characterized by persistent fatigue, post-exertional malaise, multi-
site pain, sleep disturbances, orthostatic intolerance, cognitive impairment, gastrointestinal 
symptoms and other issues. This complexity not only hinders timely diagnosis but also 
poses notable challenges for effective treatment. The pathogenesis of ME/CFS is not well 
understood, with some triggers believed to include viral infections such as Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV)1, enteroviruses2 and SARS coronavirus3, in addition to bacterial infections and 
other causes4. As a chronic disease, ME/CFS can persist for years or often a lifetime, with 
each patient developing distinct illness patterns5. Hence, a single standardized approach 
to clinical care and symptom management is unlikely to suffice; instead, personalized, 
symptom-specific strategies may be necessary to effectively address the multifaceted nature 
of ME/CFS.
For ME/CFS and other chronic diseases such as cancer, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
and long COVID, this heterogeneity has been problematic to accommodate in research 
studies, leaving substantial knowledge and technical gaps6. The approach of most cohort 
studies is to focus on identifying one or two key disease indicators, such as HbA1C levels 
for diabetes or survival rates for cancer, even with the advent of multi-omics. This approach 
has difficulty accommodating the highly multifactorial etiology and progression of most 
chronic diseases, with different patients exhibiting varying symptoms and disease markers7. 
To address this challenge, methods must link a more complex matrix of disease-associated 
outcomes with a range of omics data types to enable precise targeting of biomarkers tailored 
to each patient’s specific symptoms.
In this study, we generated and assembled a longitudinal, multi-omics dataset from 153 
patients with ME/CFS and 96 age- and gender-matched healthy controls, encompassing 
gut metagenomics, plasma metabolomics, immune cell profiling (including activation 
and cytokine measures), blood labs, detailed clinical symptoms and lifestyle surveys. To 
integrate these diverse data types with ME/CFS symptomatology, we developed BioMapAI, 
an explainable supervised deep neural network (DNN) that maps multi-omics profiles to 
a matrix of clinical symptoms. We aimed to identify disease biomarkers for ME/CFS, 
including those specifically tied to its heterogeneous symptomatology, and map interactions 
among the microbiome, immune system and metabolome rather than focusing on single or 
pairwise data types.
Using BioMapAI, we identified both disease- and symptom-specific biomarkers, 
reconstructed key clinical symptoms and classified ME/CFS disease in held-out and 
external cohorts. We then constructed a comprehensive multi-omics connectivity map that 
refines existing hypotheses and proposes unique ones regarding microbial, metabolomic 
and immune factors in ME/CFS. Critically, we accounted for confounders such as age 
Xiong et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

and gender to contextualize the interplay among data types in health versus disease. For 
example, we observed that depletion of microbial short-chain fatty acids (for example, 
butyrate) and branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) in ME/CFS is linked to abnormal 
activation of mucosal and inflammatory immune cells (MAIT and γδT), which produce 
IFN-γ and GzA—an altered dynamic correlated with worse perceived health and reduced 
social activity. Furthermore, microbial metabolites such as tryptophan and benzoate 
displayed fewer connections with plasma lipids in patients, an association that in turn 
tracked with fatigue, emotional dysregulation and sleep disturbances.
This dataset is among the most comprehensive multi-omics resources assembled for 
ME/CFS (including other complex chronic diseases). We further introduce an innovative 
AI approach that begins to address the multifaceted nature of this chronic disease, generating 
unique hypotheses for host–microbiome interactions in both health and ME/CFS. Given 
the recognized parallels in both etiology and clinical presentation between ME/CFS and 
long COVID8,9, studying ME/CFS can offer broader insights into the pathophysiology of 
postviral syndromes. More generally, our AI-driven framework may prove valuable for other 
complex conditions where symptom variability cannot be fully captured by a single data 
type.
Results
Cohort overview
We tracked 249 participants over 3 to 4 years, including 153 patients with ME/CFS (75 
‘short-term’ with disease symptoms <4 years and 78 ‘long-term’ with disease symptoms 
>10 years) and 96 healthy controls (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1). The cohort is 
68% female and 32% male, aligning with the epidemiological data showing that women 
are three to four times more likely to develop ME/CFS10,11. Participants ranged in age 
from 19 to 68 y, with body mass indexes (BMIs) from 16 to 43 kg/m2. Throughout the 
study, we collected detailed clinical metadata, blood samples and fecal samples. In total, 
1471 biological samples were collected across all participants at 515 time points (Methods, 
Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1).
Blood samples were sent for clinical testing at Quest Laboratory (48 features measured, 
n = 503 samples) and fractionated into peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) (which 
were examined via flow cytometry, yielding data on 443 immune cells and cytokines 
(n = 489), plasma and serum (for untargeted liquid chromatography with tandem mass 
spectrometry, identifying 958 metabolites (n = 414)). Detailed demographic documentation 
and questionnaires covering medication use, medical history and key ME/CFS symptoms 
were collected (Methods). Finally, whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing of stool 
samples (n = 479) produced an average of 12,302,079 high-quality, classifiable reads per 
sample, detailing gut microbiome composition (1,293 species detected) and KEGG gene 
function (9,993 genes reconstructed).
Xiong et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Heterogeneity and nonlinear progression of ME/CFS
First, we demonstrated the phenotypic complexity and heterogeneity of ME/CFS. 
Collaborating with clinical experts, we consolidated detailed questionnaires and clinical 
metadata foundational to diagnosing ME/CFS into 12 essential clinical scores (Methods). 
These scores covered core symptoms including physical and mental health, fatigue, pain 
levels, cognitive efficiency, sleep disturbances, orthostatic intolerance and gastrointestinal 
issues (Supplementary Table 1).
Although healthy individuals consistently presented low symptom scores (Extended Data 
Fig. 1d,f), patients with ME/CFS exhibited significant variability in symptom severity, with 
each individual showing different predominant symptoms (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 
1c,g). Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of the omics matrices highlighted the difficulty 
in distinguishing patients from controls, emphasizing the complex symptomatology of 
ME/CFS and the challenges in developing predictive models (Extended Data Fig. 1e). 
Additionally, over time, in contrast to the stable patterns typical of healthy individuals 
(Extended Data Fig. 1b), patients with ME/CFS demonstrated distinctly varied patterns each 
year, as evidenced by the diversity in symptom severity and noticeable separation on the 
omics PCoA (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1c). Despite using multiple longitudinal 
models (Methods), we found no consistent temporal signals, confirming the nonlinear 
progression of ME/CFS.
This individualized, multifaceted and dynamic nature of ME/CFS that intensifies with 
disease progression necessitates unique approaches that extend beyond simple disease versus 
control comparisons. Here, we created and implemented an AI-driven model that integrates 
the multi-omics profiles to learn host phenotypes. This allowed us not only to develop a 
disease classifier but also, more importantly, to identify specific biomarker sets for each 
clinical symptom as well as unique interaction networks that differed between patients and 
controls.
BioMapAI, a neural network connects omic to multi-outcomes
ME/CFS research is hindered by the complexity of its clinical phenotypes and biological 
measurements, which are highly individualized. To associate multi-omics data with clinical 
symptoms, a model must accommodate the learning of multiple different outcomes within 
a single framework. However, traditional machine learning models are generally designed 
to predict a single categorical outcome or continuous variable12-14. This simplified disease 
classification and conventional biomarker identification typically fails to encapsulate the 
heterogeneity of complex diseases15,16. Our goal was to integrate multi-omics data with 
clinical symptoms into a single model, which would enable a direct comparison of the 
predictive value of different omics datasets and the identification of symptom-specific 
biomarkers within a unified framework.
We developed an AI-powered multi-omics framework, BioMapAI, a fully connected DNN 
that inputs omics matrices (X), and outputs a mixed-type outcome matrix (Y), thereby 
mapping multiple omics features to multiple clinical indicators (Fig. 2a). By assigning 
tailored loss functions for each output to each output based on its data type (Methods), 
Xiong et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

BioMapAI aims to comprehensively learn every y (that is, each of the 12 continuous or 
categorical clinical scores in this study), using the omics data inputs. Between the input 
layer X and the output layer Y = [y1, y2, …, yn], the model consists of two shared hidden layers 
(Z1 with 64 nodes, and Z2 with 32 nodes) for general pattern learning, followed by a 
parallel hidden layer (Z3 = [z1
3, z2
3, …, zn
3]), with sublayers (zn
3, each with 8 nodes) tailored for 
each outcome (yn), to capture outcome-specific patterns (Fig. 2a). This unique architecture 
(two shared and one specific hidden layer) allows the model to capture both general 
and output-specific patterns. This model is made explainable by incorporating a SHAP 
(SHapley Additive exPlanations) explainer, which quantifies the feature importance of each 
predictions, providing both local (symptom-level) and global (disease-level) interpretability, 
and flexible by automatically finding appropriate learning goals and loss functions for each 
type of outcomes (without need of format refinement), facilitating BioMapAI’s potential 
adaptability to broader research applications.
BioMapAI, reconstructing symptoms and classifying disease
BioMapAI is a supervised DL AI framework that connects a biological omics matrix to 
multiple phenotypic outputs. Here, we trained and validated it on our ME/CFS dataset, using 
a tenfold cross-validation. Additionally, 10% of the data was held out as an independent 
validation set, separate from the cross-validation process, to assess the model’s prediction 
accuracy (Methods and Supplementary Tables 3 and 6). We trained and reported one model 
per omics dataset (GitHub), collectively named DeepMECFS for the ME/CFS community—
for example, DeepMECFS-Immune for the immune matrix and DeepMECFS-Metabolome 
for the metabolome matrix. Furthermore, we integrated the most predictive features from 
each omics model into a comprehensive profile of 154 features (Methods), and named 
the model DeepMECFS-Omics. Those trained models were represented the structure of 
diverse clinical symptom score types and as anticipated given patient symptomatology, 
discriminated between healthy individuals and patients (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 2 and 
Supplementary Tables 2 and 3), for example in physical health and pain scores. Though 
compressing some inherent variance, BioMapAI reconstructed key statistical measures such 
as the mean and interquartile range (IQR) (25%–75%), and highlighted the distinctions 
between healthy and disease (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 2a,b and Supplementary Table 2).
To determine the accuracy of BioMapAI’s reconstructed clinical scores, we compared their 
ability to discriminate patients with ME/CFS from controls with the original clinical scores. 
We used one additional fully connected layer to regress the 12 predicted clinical scores Y
(12, ) into a binary outcome of patient vs. control y(1,). Because the diagnosis of ME/CFS 
relies on clinical interpretation of key symptoms (that is, the original clinical scores), the 
original clinical scores have near-perfect accuracy in classification, as expected (area under 
the curve (AUC) >99%; Extended Data Fig. 2c). BioMapAI’s predicted scores achieved 
a 91% AUC in distinguishing disease from healthy controls as evaluated through 10-fold 
cross-validation (Fig. 2d). We also compared it with four machine learning models (a 
generalized linear model with elastic net regularization (Glmnet), Glmnet with interaction 
terms, support vector machine (SVM), and gradient boosting) and a deep learning model 
(DNN) with two fully connected layers but without the third spread-out hidden layer 
Xiong et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(Supplementary Table 3). In terms of the 10-fold cross-validation for disease classification, 
BioMapAI, DNN and Glmnet performed comparably overall. BioMapAI showed slightly 
better performance with the full omics dataset (AUC = 91.5%), immune data (81.8%) and 
species data (74.5%), whereas Glmnet had a higher AUC in metabolome (79.0%) and blood 
laboratory (Quest) data (72.5%).
We tested BioMapAI’s ability to classify disease with unseen data, including held-out 
cohort datasets (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 3) and independent, previously published 
ME/CFS cohorts (Fig. 2e and Supplementary Table 3). In the held-out datasets, BioMapAI 
had higher AUC in omics (AUC = 82.3%), immune (78.5%), KEGG (69.1%), species 
(71.5%), and metabolome (76.4%), whereas Glmnet excelled in blood laboratory (Quest) 
data (74.8%). Public datasets included two microbiome cohorts (Guo et al. (United States)17 
and Raijmakers et al. (Netherlands)18) and two metabolome cohorts (Germain et al. (United 
States)19 and Che et al. (United States)20). Bio-MapAI had a higher AUC than other 
models in five out of six external comparisons: Guo (species, AUC = 71.9%; KEGG, 
59.1%), Raijmakers (KEGG, 60.6%), Germain (metabolome, 68.1%) and Che (metabolome, 
61.3%). The DNN model had the highest AUC in Raijmakers, species (77.3%) (Fig. 
2e, Supplementary Table 3). BioMapAI’s accuracy using these external datasets was 
lower reflecting cohort differences and the absence of some input features (for example, 
metabolomic features only overlapped by 79% and 19% for the two studies, respectively). 
Despite the challenges of validating traditional microbiome and metabolite ML models 
using external cohorts (often having technical and clinical differences21,22), BioMapAI 
still has better performance at five out of six comparisons. This highlights the value of 
incorporating clinical symptoms into a classification model, demonstrating that connecting 
omics features to clinical symptoms improves disease classification.
Omics strengths varied in symptom prediction
One innovation of BioMapAI is its ability to leverage different omics data to predict 
individual clinical scores in addition to disease vs. healthy classification. We evaluated 
the predictive accuracy by calculating the mean squared error (MSE) between actual (y) 
and predicted (y) scores and observed that the different omics showed varying strengths 
in predicting clinical scores (Fig. 2c), likely due in part to the wide differences in 
dimensionality specific to each data type. Immune profiling consistently had the highest 
ability to forecast a wide range of symptoms, including pain, fatigue, orthostatic intolerance 
and general health perception, underscoring the immune system’s crucial role in health 
regulation. In contrast, blood measurements demonstrated limited predictive ability, except 
for cognitive efficiency, likely owing to their limited focus on 48 specific blood bioactives. 
Plasma metabolomics, which encompasses nearly a thousand measurements, performed 
significantly better with notable correlations with facets of physical health and social 
activity. These findings corroborate published metabolites and mortality23,24, longevity25,26, 
cognitive function27 and social interactions28-30. Microbiome profiles surpassed other omics 
in predicting gastrointestinal abnormalities (as anticipated31,32), emotional well-being and 
sleep disturbances, supporting recently established links in gut–brain health33-35.
Xiong et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

BioMapAI identified disease- and symptom-specific biomarkers
Deep learning (DL) models are often referred to as ‘black box’, with limited ability to 
identify and evaluate specific features that influence the model’s predictions. BioMapAI 
is made explainable by incorporating SHAP values, which quantify how each feature 
influenced the model’s predictions. BioMapAI’s architecture (two shared layers (Z1 and 
Z2) for general disease pattern learning and one parallel layer for each clinical score; 
Z3 = [z1
3, z2,
3 , …, z12
3 ]) allowed us to identify both disease-specific biomarkers, which are shared 
across symptoms and models (Extended Data Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 4), and 
symptom-specific biomarkers, which are tailored to each clinical symptom (Fig. 3, Extended 
Data Figs. 4 and 5 and Supplementary Table 5).
Disease-specific biomarkers are important features across symptoms and models (Methods 
and Extended Data Fig. 3). Increased B cells (CD19+ CD3−), CCR6+ CD8 memory T 
cells (mCD8+ CCR6+ CXCR3−) and CD4 naive T cells (nCD4+ FOXP3+) in patients were 
associated with most symptoms, suggesting a potentially broad dysregulation of the adaptive 
immune response. The species model highlighted the correlation of Dysosmobacteria 
welbionis, a gut microbe previously reported in obesity and diabetes, with bile acid 
and butyrate metabolism36,37. The metabolome model categorized increased levels of 
glycodeoxycholate 3-sulfate, a bile acid, and decreased vanillylmandelate, a catecholamine 
breakdown product38. These features shared for all symptoms were consistently validated 
across ML and DL models, demonstrating the efficacy of BioMapAI (Supplementary Table 
4).
More uniquely, BioMapAI linked omics profiles to clinical symptoms to identify symptom-
specific biomarkers (Fig. 3a). Certain omics data, like species-gastrointestinal and immune-
pain associations, had a higher ability to predict specific clinical phenotypes (Fig. 2c). 
Using SHAP with training dataset, BioMapAI identified biomarkers for each symptom 
(Supplementary Table 5 and Extended Data Fig. 5). We found that although disease-specific 
biomarkers accounted for a substantial portion of the variance, symptom-specific biomarkers 
refined the predictions and aligned predicted scores (consistently across age and gender) 
more closely with actual values (Fig. 3a,b, Extended Data Fig. 4b-d). For example, for 
pain, CD4 memory and CD1c+ dendritic cells (DC) were more contributory features, 
and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii was also uniquely associated, with varying impact across 
individuals (Fig. 3b).
In addition, we observed a spectrum of interaction types (linear, biphasic, and dispersed) 
extending beyond conventional linear interactions, underscoring the heterogeneity inherent 
in ME/CFS (Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 5). For example, a monotonic (linear) 
relationship was observed with many immune cell features; CD4 M cells were positively 
associated and CD1c+ DCs negatively associated with pain intensity (Fig. 3c,e). Many 
microbial biomarkers, particularly higher abundance ones, demonstrated linear contributions 
to symptoms (that is, numerous negative peaks indicating a positive association in symptom 
severity, Fig. 3a). For example, Dysosmobacteria welbionis was associated with more severe 
sleeping and gastrointestinal scores (Extended Data Fig. 3), whereas Clostridium sp. and 
Xiong et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Alistipes communis were associated with less severe scores (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Fig. 
5b).
A biphasic relationship was observed in the association of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii with 
pain, whose saddle curve (Fig. 3c) had a mixture of positive and negative contribution 
peaks (Fig. 3b), meaning that either abnormally low and high relative abundances could be 
associated with pain severity. That is, in disease, F. prausnitzii was associated with higher 
pain scores, whereas in healthy individuals, it was associated with lower pain scores (Fig. 
3d). Notably, F. prausnitzii was identified as a biomarker in several ME/CFS cohorts1,18, 
but also has anti-inflammatory associations39,40. Here, BioMapAI identified a similar duality 
in its association with symptom severity. Other biphasic relationships were observed for 
plasma metabolomics biomarkers, glucuronide and glutamine, in relation to pain (Fig. 3c). 
Finally, distinct from other omics features, KEGG genes exhibited sparse and dispersed 
contributions (Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 4c). The vast feature matrix of KEGG 
models complicated the identification of a universal biomarker for any single symptom, as 
individuals possessed distinct symptom-specific KEGG biomarkers.
Taken together, BioMapAI made associations between symptomspecific biomarkers and 
clinical phenotypes, which has been inaccessible to single models to date. Although we 
note that the clinical relevance of these associations remain unknown, our models unveil 
a nuanced correlation between omics features and disease symptomology, likely mirroring 
ME/CFS’s complex etiology.
Healthy cross-omics networks are dysbiotic in ME/CFS
BioMapAI elucidated that each omics layer provided distinct associations with disease 
symptoms, suggesting a dynamic and complex interaction with host phenotypes. To examine 
crosstalk between omics layers, we modeled co-expression modules for each omics using 
weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA; Methods and Supplemental 
Table 7). Observing significant associations of these modules with disease classification 
(microbial modules), age, and gender (immune and metabolome modules) (Extended Data 
Fig. 6a; false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted P values in Supplementary Table 7), we 
first established baseline networks of inter-omics interactions by calculating Spearman 
correlation coefficients (Methods) among the module eigengenes of each omics cluster. 
An adjacency matrix (Supplementary Table 7) was constructed using a cutoff of 0.3 
to identify meaningful correlations, focusing on healthy individuals and incorporating 
clinical covariates such as age, weight and gender (Fig. 4a). We then examined how these 
correlations were altered in patient populations (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 6b,c).
Healthy control-derived interactions, such as the microbial pyruvate module associating 
with multiple immune modules, and connections between commensal gut microbes 
(Prevotella, Clostridia sp., Ruminococcaceae) with Th17 memory cells, plasma steroids, 
phospholipids and tocopherol (vitamin E) (Fig. 4a), were disrupted in patients with ME/
CFS. Increased correlations between gut microbiome and mucosal/inflammatory immune 
modules, including CD8+ MAIT and IFN-γ+ CD4 memory cells, suggested an increased 
association with microbiome and inflammatory elements in ME/CFS (Extended Data Fig. 
6d). Notably, these interactions could differ by age, gender and weight (Fig. 4b).
Xiong et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Further examining several microbial modules whose networks were dysbiotic in patients, 
we mapped the correlations of their metabolic subpathways to plasma metabolites and 
immune cells and detailed the collective associations with host phenotypes (Fig. 4c and 
Supplementary Table 8). We further validated these findings with two independent cohorts 
(Guo et al.17 and Raijmakers et al.18). For example, increased tryptophan metabolism, 
associated with gastrointestinal issues, lost its negative association with Th22 cells, and 
gained correlations with γδ T cells and the secretion of IFN-γ and GzA from CD8 and 
CD8+ MAIT cells. Several networks associated with emotional dysregulation and fatigue 
differed significantly in patients versus controls: decreased butyrate production and BCAA 
biosynthesis, which had opposite correlations with Th17 and regulatory T cells (Treg cells); 
plasma lipids had more correlations with γδ T and CD8+ MAIT cells in patients; and 
microbial benzoate, which is synthesized by Clostridia sp.41 and then converted to hippurate 
in the liver42, was positively correlated with plasma hippurate in long-term patients with 
ME/CFS. These disrupted pathways also had modified associations with a variety of plasma 
metabolites including steroids, phenols, BCAAs, fatty acids and vitamins B5 and B6. 
Notably, short-term patients with ME/CFS presented a transitional profile, resembling an 
intermediate between controls and long-term ME/CFS.
Based on BioMapAI’s predictions and subsequent network analyses, we propose that some 
of the disease-specific changes in ME/CFS arise from disrupted associations between the 
gut microbiome, immune system, and metabolome (Fig. 5). Reduced relative abundances 
of key microbes—such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii—and corresponding disturbances in 
microbial metabolic pathways (for example, butyrate, tryptophan and BCAA production) 
correlated with pain and gastrointestinal abnormalities in ME/CFS. In healthy controls, 
these microbial metabolites are associated with activity of mucosal immune cells, including 
Th17, Th22 and Treg cells. In ME/CFS, however, these regulatory networks break down, 
with heightened proinflammatory responses mediated by γδ T cells and CD8 MAIT cells 
producing IFN-γ and GzA, which in turn were associated with subjective health perception 
and social functioning.
Additional health-associated interactions between microbial benzoate metabolism and 
various plasma metabolites (for example, lipids, glycerophosphoethanolamine, fatty acids, 
and bile acids) we hypothesized are also diminished or reversed in ME/CFS. This 
breakdown in host–microbiome metabolic networks correlates with more severe fatigue, 
emotional disturbances, and sleep problems, aligning with emerging evidence that 
microbially derived metabolites may affect the gut–brain axis43-45.
Discussion
Democratization of AI technologies and large-scale multi-omics has the promise of 
revolutionizing precision medicine46. This study generated among the most extensive 
paired multi-omics dataset for ME/CFS to date17-20,47, bringing unique technical and 
biological insights. Technically, BioMapAI marks a unique supervised DL model trained 
to accommodate these complex, multisystem ME/CFS symptoms. The rationale behind 
BioMapAI is that understanding long-term, post-infection syndromes like ME/CFS is 
not necessarily solved by pinpointing an exact diagnosis or tracing disease origins48, 
Xiong et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

but rather by addressing the chronic, multifaceted symptoms that substantially impacts 
patients’ quality of life49. Biologically, our study introduces a highly nuanced approach 
to link physiological changes in gut microbiome, plasma metabolome, and immune status, 
with host symptoms, moving beyond the initial causes of the disease50,51. Importantly, 
we validated key biomarkers in external cohorts17-20, despite significant demographic and 
methodological differences between the studies.
This study represents a substantial technical and biological advance over our previous 
work and other investigations of ME/CFS to date. First, we developed BioMapAI, a 
supervised DNN architecture that accommodates the full complexity of our multi-omics 
data-sets—encompassing gut microbiome, plasma metabolome, immune profiling, blood 
labs, and extensive clinical surveys—beyond what traditional ML models can handle. By 
jointly modeling these diverse data types, BioMapAI explains the phenotypic heterogeneity 
of ME/CFS more effectively than single-outcome methods and simultaneously identifies 
symptom-specific biomarkers. Furthermore, our dataset’s unprecedented size, in both 
participant numbers and the depth of data types, allowed us to build an AI model validated 
on both held-out data and external cohorts. As a sanity check, we confirmed key biomarkers
—such as altered Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and butyrate producers (reported by Guo et 
al.) as well as sphingolipid pathway changes (described by Raijmakers et al., Germain et 
al. and Che et al.)—using independent datasets, which other studies have not performed. 
Nonetheless, we acknowledge a caveat of our model is that distinguishing ME/CFS from 
healthy controls may be less challenging than differentiating ME/CFS from other conditions 
with overlapping symptoms, such as fibromyalgia. Future studies with comparative disease 
datasets are needed to assess this.
Second, we added a unique, detailed blood immune-profiling dataset, which provided 
the most biologically explanatory features for both disease classification and symptom 
severity. Leveraging these data, we were able to construct unique microbiome–metabolome–
immune networks in both health and ME/CFS—an advance over earlier investigations that 
generally focused on only one omics layer (for example, stool microbiome in Guo et 
al.; plasma metabolomics in Germain et al. and Che et al.). Although Raijmakers et al. 
examined 92 inflammatory circulating markers, plasma metabolites and gut microbiome 
in a smaller study (n = 50 ME∕CFS, n = 72 healthy control for metagenomics, and n = 22
for metabolomics), their analyses were relatively limited in that they used ML models 
to differentiate ME/CFS from controls and only examined fatigue as a clinical variate, 
not adjusting for other clinical variables that could affect omics associations such as age, 
gender, or BMI. Moreover, their approach only assessed pairwise associations among data 
types. In contrast, our multi-omics strategy explicitly accounts for demographic and clinical 
covariates like age, gender and BMI, revealing that these factors can markedly reshape 
immune–microbiome–metabolome interaction networks, just as comorbid conditions such as 
obesity or advanced age can further individualize disease phenotypes.
Taken together, our dataset uncovers an array of correlations that although not causal, 
can further our understanding of ME/CFS in several ways. First, our analyses underscore 
the importance of considering clinical symptom heterogeneity and cohort-level covariates 
because interactions among the microbiome, metabolome, and immune system vary 
Xiong et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

substantially depending on these factors. Although it has long been assumed that 
confounders play a major role, previous studies have seldom controlled for them in a 
comprehensive manner, potentially explaining some of the inconsistencies reported in 
single-omics analyses. Second, although our findings are correlative rather than causal, they 
generate numerous hypotheses about both specific and more extensive pathways that may be 
disrupted in ME/CFS.
For example, our previous analysis, and work by Guo et al., suggest that diminished 
butyrate-producing microbes in ME/CFS lower the availability of short-chain fatty acids 
(SCFAs) in the stool (Guo) and plasma (Xiong). Here, we refine that hypothesis by 
pinpointing potential immunological or metabolic mediators of this change. In healthy 
controls, multiple butyrate biosynthesis routes are inversely associated with Th17 cells, 
whereas the glutarate→butyrate pathway aligns with Treg cells. These patterns become 
largely reversed in long-term disease, with succinate→butyrate showing unique negative 
correlations to Treg cells and positive links with CD8+ MAIT cells. ME/CFS also 
substantially alters metabolite associations with Th17 cells. On the metabolomic side, 
there is currently no direct biochemical link reported between glutarate→butyrate and 
glycerophosphoethanolamine—though in healthy controls, they exhibited a strong positive 
correlation that was altered in ME/CFS. One can then hypothesize an indirect link with 
phospholipid metabolism and its effect on neurotransmission.
In addition to refining established hypotheses, our results propose unique links among 
tryptophan metabolism, BCAAs and benzoate metabolism in shaping immune function 
and symptomatology in ME/CFS. Although no direct biochemical connection between 
tryptophan metabolism and 2-hydroxyglutarate is currently known, both pathways likely 
influence immune regulation and metabolic reprogramming, indicating a more complex 
regulatory landscape. In healthy controls, tryptophan metabolism is closely tied to various 
T cell subsets, including Th22 cells, whereas these relationships are disrupted in ME/CFS. 
Furthermore, we observed significant alterations in benzoate metabolism modules and their 
associations with plasma steroids, hippurate, and fatty acids. These pathways, linked to both 
steroid biosynthesis and neurotransmitter production (for example, serotonin or cortisol), 
highlight a potential gut–brain axis component in ME/CFS pathophysiology.
Although some of these findings may seem granular or only indirectly testable (such as 
potential sex differences in the interaction network), our detailed, multi-omics perspective 
is valuable for unraveling the disease’s heterogeneity. As experimental models attempt to 
validate these hypotheses, one must keep in mind that many interactions may be context 
or model specific rather than universally turned on or off in disease states. This context 
dependency underscores the need for nuanced, carefully controlled mechanistic studies that 
incorporate patient heterogeneity and environmental factors when investigating ME/CFS.
Additional limitations of our study include that that our study population comprised more 
females and older individuals, most of whom were white (though this is consistent with the 
epidemiology of ME/CFS10), and was from a single geographic location (Bateman Horne 
Center), which may limit our findings to certain populations. In addition, previous RNA 
sequencing studies have suggested mitochondrial dysfunction and altered energy metabolism 
Xiong et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in ME/CFS52,53; thus, incorporating host PBMC RNA or ATAC sequencing in future 
research could provide deeper insights into regulatory changes. The typical decades-long 
disease progression of ME/CFS makes it challenging for our 4-year longitudinal design to 
capture stable temporal signals (although separating our short-term (<4 years) and longterm 
(>10 years) provided valuable insights); ideally, tracking the same patients over a longer 
period would likely yield more accurate trends54. Long disease history also increases 
the likelihood of exposure to various diets and medications55, which could influence 
biomarker identification, particularly in metabolomics. Finally, model-wise, Bio-MapAI 
was trained on <500 samples with tenfold cross-validation, which is relatively small given 
the complexity of the outcome matrix; expanding the training dataset and incorporating 
more independent validation sets could potentially enhance its performance and prediction 
accuracy56. Currently, the model treated all 12 studied symptoms with equal importance 
due to the unclear symptom prioritization in ME/CFS57. We computed modules to assign 
different weights to symptoms to enhance diagnostic accuracy. Although this approach was 
not particularly effective for ME/CFS, it may be more promising for diseases with more 
clearly defined symptom hierarchies58. In such cases, adjusting the weights of symptoms in 
the model’s final layer could improve performance and help pinpoint which symptoms more 
strongly contributing.
Although our findings are still preliminary for direct therapeutic application, the nuanced 
insights and deconstructed approach described here offer numerous hypotheses for 
dysbiotic microbiome–metabolome–immune connections in ME/CFS. We hope that the 
unprecedented systems-level resolution of our dataset, algorithm, and analyses will 
contribute to filling out heretofore unknown links between these factors thus explaining 
some of the disease heterogeneity in this important disease.
Methods
Study design
This was 4-year prospective study. All participants had a physical examination at the 
baseline visit that included evaluation of vital signs, BMI, orthostatic vital signs, skin, 
lymphatic system, HEENT, pulmonary, cardiac, abdomen, musculoskeletal, nervous system 
and fibromyalgia tender points. We enrolled a total of 153 patients with ME/CFS (of 
which 75 had been diagnosed with ME/CFS < 4 years before recruitment and 78 had been 
diagnosed with ME/CFS > 10 years before recruitment) and 96 healthy controls. Among 
them, 110 patients and 58 healthy controls were followed 1 year after the recruitment as 
timepoint 2; 81 patients and 13 healthy controls were followed 2 years after the recruitment 
as timepoint 3; and 4 patients were followed 4 years after the recruitment as timepoint 4. 
Subject characteristics are shown in Supplementary Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1a.
Medical history and concomitant medications were documented. Blood samples were 
obtained before orthostatic and cognitive testing. The 10-min NASA Lean Test and 
cognitive testing were conducted after the physical examination and blood draw59. Cognitive 
efficiency was tested with the DANA Brain Vital, measuring three reaction time and 
information processing measurements60. The orthostatic challenge was assessed with the 
Xiong et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

10-min NASA Lean Test. Participants rested supine for 10 min, and baseline blood pressure 
and heart rate were measured twice during the last 2 min of rest61.
Participants were provided with an at-home stool collection kit at the end of each in-
person visit. The following questionnaires were completed at baseline: DePaul Symptom 
Questionnaire (DSQ), Post-Exertional Fatigue Questionnaire, RAND-36, Fibromyalgia 
Impact Questionnaire-R, ACR 2010 Fibromyalgia Criteria Symptom Questionnaire, 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Stanford Brief Activity Survey, Orthostatic Intolerance 
Daily Activity Scale, Orthostatic Intolerance Symptom Assessment, Brief Wellness Survey, 
Hours of Upright Activity (HUA) and medical history and family history. All but medical 
history and family history were administered again when participants came for their annual 
visit.
Approval was received before enrolling any subjects in the study (The Jackson Laboratory 
Institutional Review Board, 17-JGM-13). All participants were educated about the study 
before enrollment and signed all appropriate informed consent documents. Research staff 
followed Good Clinical Practices (GCP) guidelines to ensure subject safety and privacy.
ME/CFS cohort
Beginning in January 2018, we enrolled patients with ME/CFS who had been sick for <4 
years or sick for >10 years. No patients with ME/CFS with duration ≥4 years and ≤10 years 
were enrolled to have clear distinctions between short and long duration of illness with ME/
CFS. All participants were 18 to 65 years old at the time of enrollment. ME/CFS diagnosis 
according to the Institute of Medicine clinical diagnostic criteria and disease duration of <4 
years were confirmed during clinical differential diagnosis and thorough medical work up62. 
Additional inclusion criteria required 1) a substantial reduction or impairment in the ability 
to engage in pre-illness levels of occupational, educational, social or personal activities that 
persists for more than 6 months and less than 4 years and is accompanied by fatigue, which 
is often profound, is of new or definite onset (not lifelong), is not the result of ongoing 
excessive exertion, and is not substantially alleviated by rest, and 2) post-exertional malaise. 
Exclusionary criteria for the <4 years ME/CFS cohort were 1) morbid obesity BMI > 40; 
2) other active and untreated disease processes that explain most of the major symptoms 
of fatigue, sleep disturbance, pain, and cognitive dysfunction; 3) untreated primary sleep 
disorders; 4) rheumatological disorders; 5) immune disorders; 6) neurological disorders; 
7) infectious diseases; 8) psychiatric disorders that alter perception of reality or ability 
to communicate clearly or impair physical health and function; 9) laboratory testing or 
imaging are available that support an alternate exclusionary diagnosis; and 10) treatment 
with short-term (less than 2 weeks) antiviral or antibiotic medication within the past 30 days.
For the >10 years ME/CFS cohort, disease duration of >10 years and clinical criteria were 
confirmed to meet the Institute of Medicine criteria for ME/CFS during clinical evaluation 
and medical history review62. Other than disease duration, inclusion and exclusion criteria 
were the same as for <4 years ME/CFS cohort.
Xiong et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Healthy control cohort
Healthy control participants were also between 18 to 65 years and in general good health. 
Enrollment began in 2018 and subjects were selected to match the <4 years ME/CFS cohort 
by age (within 5 years), race, and sex (~2:1 female to male ratio). Exclusion criteria for 
healthy controls included, 1) a diagnosis or history of ME/CFS, 2) morbid obesity BMI > 
40, 3) treatment with short-term (less than 2 weeks) antiviral or antibiotic medication within 
the past 30 days, or 4) treatment long-term (longer than 2 weeks) antiviral medication or 
immunomodulatory medications within the past 6 months.
Clinical metadata and scores
Clinical symptoms and baseline health status were assessed on the day of physical 
examination and biological sample collection for both case and control subjects. For each 
participant, we collected demographic information (including age, gender, diet, race, BMI, 
family, work, and education), medical histories, clinical tests and questionnaires. From 
questionnaires and test as described above, we summarized 12 clinical scores to cover major 
symptoms of ME/CFS: Scores 1–8 were derived from the RAND-36, following standardized 
rules63 and summarized into eight categories: Physical Functioning (also referred to as 
Daily Activity in the main contents), Role Limitations due to Physical Health (Physical 
Limitations), Role Limitations due to Emotional Problems (Emotional Problems), Energy/
Fatigue, Emotional Well-being (Mental Health), Social Functioning (Social Activity), Pain, 
and General Health (Health Perception). Cognitive Efficiency was summarized from the 
DANA Brain Vital test, Orthostatic Intolerance from the NASA Lean Test, Sleeping Problem 
Score from the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index questionnaire and Gastrointestinal Problems 
Score from the Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale questionnaire. Each score was 
transformed into a 0–1 scale to facilitate combination and comparison, where a score of 
1 indicates maximum disability or severity and a score of 0 indicates no disability or 
disturbance.
Plasma sample collection and preparation
Healthy and patient blood samples were obtained from Bateman Horne Center and approved 
by JAX IRB. One 4 ml lavender top tube (K2EDTA) was collected, and tube slowly inverted 
8–10 times immediately after collection. Blood was centrifuged within 30 min of collection 
at 1,000g with low brake for 10 min. Then, 250 μl plasma was transferred into three 1 ml 
cryovial tubes, and tubes were frozen upright at −80 °C. Frozen plasma samples were batch 
shipped overnight on dry ice to The Jackson Laboratory and stored at −80 °C. Heparinized 
blood samples were shipped overnight at room temperature. PBMCs were isolated using 
Ficoll-paque plus (GE Healthcare) and cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen.
Plasma untargeted metabolome by UPLC-MS/MS
Plasma samples were sent to Metabolon platform and processed by Ultrahigh performance 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy (UPLC-MS/MS) following the CFS 
cohort pipeline. In brief, samples were prepared using the automated MicroLab STAR 
system from Hamilton Company. The extract was divided into five fractions: two for 
analysis by two separate reverse phases (RP)/UPLC-MS/MS methods with positive ion 
Xiong et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

mode electrospray ionization (ESI), one for analysis by RP/UPLC-MS/MS with negative 
ion mode ESI, one for analysis by HILIC/UPLC-MS/MS with negative ion mode ESI 
and one sample was reserved for backup. Quality assurance/quality control were analyzed 
with several types of controls were analyzed including a pooled matrix sample generated 
by taking a small volume of each experimental sample (or alternatively, use of a pool 
of well-characterized human plasma), extracted water samples, and a cocktail of quality 
control standards that were carefully chosen not to interfere with the measurement of 
endogenous compounds were spiked into every analyzed sample, allowed instrument 
performance monitoring, and aided chromatographic alignment. Compounds were identified 
by comparison to Metabolon library entries of purified standards or recurrent unknown 
entities. The output raw data included the annotations and the value of peaks quantified 
using area under-the curve for metabolites.
Immune profiling flow cytometry analysis
Frozen PBMC aliquots were thawed, counted, and divided into two parts: one part for day 
0 surface staining, and the other cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium (RPMI plus 
10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Corning Cellgro)) supplemented with IL-2 + 
IL-15 (20 ng ml−1) for Treg subsets. Day 1 surface and transcription factor staining followed 
culture with IL-7 (20 ng ml−1) for day 1 and day 6 intracellular cytokine staining, and a 
combination of cytokines (20 ng ml−1 IL-12, 20 ng ml−1 IL-15 and 40 ng ml−1 IL-18) for 
day 1 intracellular cytokine staining (IL-12 from R&D, IL-7 and IL-15 from BioLegend).
Surface staining was performed in PBS + 2% FBS for 30 min at 4 °C. When staining 
chemokine receptors, incubation was done at room temperature. Antibodies used in surface 
staining (all obtained from BioLegend) were used at a working stock concentration of 
approximately 0.5 mg ml−1: 2B4, CD1c, CD14, CD16, CD19, CD25, CD27, CD31, 
CD3, CD303, CD38, CD4, CD45RO, CD56, CD8, CD95, CD161, CCR4, CCR6, CCR7, 
CX3CR1, CXCR3, CXCR5, γδ TCR (biotin-conjugated), HLA-DR, IgG, IgM, LAG3, PD1, 
TIM3, Va7.2 and Va24Ja18.
For intracellular cytokine staining, cells were stimulated with PMA (40 ng ml−1 for 
overnight cultured cells and 20 ng ml−1 for 6-day cultured cells) and Ionomycin (500 ng 
ml−1) (both from Sigma-Aldrich) in the presence of GolgiStop (BD Biosciences) for 4 h at 
37 °C. For cytokine secretion after stimulation with IL-12 + IL-15 + IL-18, GolgiStop was 
added to the culture on day 1 for 4 h. Following surface staining with markers (CD3, CD4, 
CD8, CD161, PD1, 2B4, Vα7.2, CD45RO, CCR6, CD27), cells were washed with PBS and 
stained with fixable viability dye (eBioscience), fixed, and permeabilized using buffers from 
eBioscience according to manufacturer instructions. Intracellular antibodies from BioLegend 
were used at working concentrations of approximately 0.2 mg ml−1: FOXP3, Helios, IL-4, 
IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-17A, IL-22, Granzyme A, GM-CSF and Perforin.
Flow cytometry was performed using Cytek Aurora (Cytek Biosciences) and analyzed 
with FlowJo (Tree Star). The gating strategy used involved setting preliminary FSC/SSC 
gates of the starting cell populations, followed by defining boundaries between ‘positive’ 
and ‘negative’ staining cell populations. Detailed gating strategies are provided in the 
Supplementary Fig. 2.
Xiong et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fecal sample collection and DNA extraction
Stool was self-collected at home by volunteers using a BioCollector fecal collection kit 
(The BioCollective) according to manufacturer instructions for preservation for sequencing 
before sending the sample in a provided Styrofoam container with a cold pack. Upon receipt, 
stool and OMNIgene samples were immediately aliquoted and frozen at −80 °C for storage. 
Before aliquoting, OMNIgene stool samples were homogenized by vortexing (using the 
metal bead inside the OMNIgene tube), and then divided into two microfuge tubes, one 
with 100 μl aliquot and one with 1 ml. DNA was extracted using the Qiagen QIAamp 
96 DNA QIAcube HT Kit with the following modifications: enzymatic digestion with 50 
μg lysozyme (Sigma) and 5 U each of lysostaphin and mutanolysin (Sigma) for 30 min 
at 37 °C followed by bead-beating with 50 μg 0.1 mm of zirconium beads for 6 min on 
the Tissuelyzer II (Qiagen) before loading onto the Qiacube HT. DNA concentration was 
measured using the Qubit high-sensitivity dsDNA kit (Invitrogen).
Metagenomic shotgun sequencing
Approximately 50 μl thawed OMNIgene preserved stool sample was added to a microfuge 
tube containing 350 μl Tissue and Cell lysis buffer and 100 μg 0.1 mm zirconia beads. 
Metagenomic DNA was extracted using the QiaAmp 96 DNA QiaCube HT kit (Qiagen, 
5331) with the following modifications: each sample was digested with 5 μL of Lysozyme 
(10 mg ml−1, Sigma-Aldrich, L6876), 1 μl lysostaphin (5,000 U ml−1, Sigma-Aldrich, 
L9043) and 1 μl Mutanolysin (5,000 U ml−1, Sigma-Aldrich, M9901) were added to each 
sample to digest at 37 °C for 30 min before the bead-beating in the in the TissueLyser 
II (Qiagen) for 2 ×3 min at 30 Hz. Each sample was centrifuged for 1 min at 15,000g 
before loading 200 μl into an S-block (Qiagen, 19585) Negative (environmental) controls 
and positive (in-house mock community of 26 unique species) controls were extracted and 
sequenced with each extraction and library preparation batch to ensure sample integrity. 
Pooled libraries were sequenced over 13 sequencing runs using both HiSeq (n = 87) and 
NovaSeq (n = 392) platforms. To address potential biases arising from varying read depths, 
all samples were down-sampled, using seqtk (v1.3-r106), to 5 million reads. This threshold 
corresponds to the 95th percentile of the read count distribution across the dataset.
Sequencing adapters and low-quality bases were removed from the metagenomic reads using 
scythe (v0.994) and sickle (v1.33), respectively, with default parameters. Host reads were 
removed by mapping all sequencing reads to the hg19 human reference genome using 
Bowtie2 (v2.3.1), under ‘very-sensitive’ mode. Unmapped reads (that is, microbial reads) 
were used to estimate the relative abundance profiles of the microbial species in the samples 
using MetaPhlAn4.
Taxonomic profiling (species abundance) and KEGG gene profiling
Taxonomic compositions were profiled using Metaphlan4.0 (ref. 64) and the species whose 
average relative abundance > 1e-4 were kept for further analysis, giving 384 species. The 
gene profiling was computed with USEARCH65 (v8.0.15) (with parameters: evalue 1e-9, 
accel 0.5, top_hits_only) to KEGG Orthology (KO) database v54, giving a total of 9,452 
annotated KEGG genes. The reads count profile was normalized by DeSeq2 (ref. 66) in R. 
Xiong et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Genes with a prevalence of over 20%, meaning expressed in more than 20% of samples, 
were selected for downstream analysis.
Confounder analysis
Confounder analysis was done by R package MaAsLin2. We considered demographic 
features (including age, gender, BMI, ethnicity and race), diet records, medications 
(antivirals, antifungals, antibiotics and probiotics) and self-reported irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS) scores as potential confounders. The analysis followed the model formula:
expr ∼age + gender + bmi + ethnic + race + IBS + diet_meat
+ diet_sugar + diet_veg + diet_grains + diet_fruit + antifungals
+ antibiotics + probiotics + antivirals + (1 ∣sample_id_tp1)
where expr refers to the omics matrix. For each feature in the omics data, we ran this 
generalized linear model to identify multivariable associations between each omics feature 
and each metadata feature. Identified confounders were handled differently based on the 
type of data. For species and KEGG genes, any feature with a significant statistical 
association with any metadata feature was removed from all subsequent analyses, resulting 
in the removal of 21 species and 946 microbial genes. For immune profiling and plasma 
metabolomics, to remove the effects of identified confounders, each feature was adjusted by 
retaining the residuals64, that is, the part of the outcome not explained by the confounding 
factors, from a general linear model:
y′ = (y ∼predicted confounders) $residual
Additionally, for network and patient subset analysis (Methods), age, gender, BMI and IBS 
were not included as confounders, as we analyzed different age groups, gender groups, 
weight groups and IBS groups separately. However, other identified confounders were still 
considered in the residual models.
BioMapAI
The rationale behind BioMapAI is we believe that ME/CFS is characterized by significant 
heterogeneity and individual variability, making traditional approaches such as classifying 
patients versus controls and reporting single-disease biomarkers insufficient to us. This 
motivated us to develop a sophisticated model that directly integrates rich biological 
multi-omics data with clinical phenotypes. The primary learning goal of BioMapAI is 
to connect high-dimensional biology data, X to mixed-type output matrix, Y. Unlike 
traditional ML or DL classifiers that typically predict a single outcome, y, BioMapAI 
is designed to learn multiple objects, Y = [y1, y2, …, yn], simultaneously within a single 
model. This approach allows for the simultaneous prediction of diverse clinical outcomes 
(including binary, categorical and continuous variables) with omics profiles, thus addressing 
disease heterogeneity by tailoring each patient’s specific symptomology. The uniqueness 
of BioMapAI is it is a supervised DL model that integrates omics directly with 
clinical phenotypes in ME/CFS. This design enables simultaneous identification of 
Xiong et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

symptom-specific and disease-general biomarkers, accounting for ME/CFS’s phenotypic 
heterogeneity.
BioMapAI structure. BioMapAI is a fully connected DNN framework comprising an 
input layer X, a normalization layer, three sequential hidden layers, Z1, Z2, Z3 and one 
output layer Y.
Input layer (X) takes high-dimensional omics data, such as gene expression, species 
abundance, metabolome matrix, or any customized matrix like immune profiling and blood 
labs. Normalization layer standardizes the input features to have zero mean and unit 
variance, defined as
X′ = X −μ
σ
where μ is the mean and σ is the standard deviation calculated from training dataset. 
We used TensorFlow’s standard BatchNormalization function. During training, mean and 
variance were computed from each mini-batch, and the model maintained a moving average 
of these values over time. During inference, instead of recalculating statistics from the test 
data, the model used the moving average of the training mean and variance for normalization 
to ensure consistent feature scaling between training and inference.
Feature learning module is the core of BioMapAI, responsible for extracting and learning 
important patterns from input data. Each fully connected layer (hidden layer 1–3) is 
designed to capture complex interactions between features. Hidden layer 1 (Z1) and hidden 
layer 2 (Z2) contain 64 and 32 nodes, respectively, both with ReLU activation and a 50% 
dropout rate, defined as:
Zk = ReLU(W kZk −1 + bk), k ∈{1, 2}
Hidden layer 3 (Z3) has n parallel sublayers for each object, yi in Y. Every sublayer, Zi
3, 
contains eight nodes, represented as:
Zi
3 = ReLU(W i
3Z3 + bi
3), i ∈{1, 2, …, n}
All hidden layers used ReLU activation functions, defined as:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
Outcome prediction module is responsible for the final prediction of the objects. The output 
layer (Y) has n nodes, each representing a different object:
Xiong et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

yi =
σ(W i
4Zi
3 + bi
4) for binary object
softmax(W i
4Zi
3 + bi
4) for categorical object
W i
4Zi
3 + bi
4 for continuous object
The loss functions are dynamically assigned based on the type of each object:
ℒ=
1
N ∑i = 1
N
[yi log(yi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −yi)
for binary object
−1
N ∑i = 1
N ∑j = 1
C
yij log(yij)
for categorical object
1
N ∑i = 1
N
0.5(yi −yi)2, if ∣yi −yi ∣≤δ
δ[yi −yi ∣−0.5δ2, otherwise
for continuous object
During training, the weights are adjusted using the Adam optimizer. The learning rate was 
set to 0.01, and weights were initialized using the He normal initializer. L2 regularizations 
were applied to prevent overfitting.
The optional binary classification layer is not used for parameter training. An additional 
binary classification layer is attached to the output layer Y to evaluate the model’s 
performance in binary classification tasks. This layer is not used for training BioMapAI 
but serves as an auxiliary component to assess the accuracy of predicting binary outcomes, 
for example, disease versus control. This ScoreLayer takes the predicted scores from the 
output layer and performs binary classification:
ybinary = σ(W binaryY + bbinary)
The initial weights of the 12 scores are derived from the original clinical data, and the 
weights are adjusted based on the accuracy of BioMapAI’s predictions:
wnew = wold −η∇ℒMSE
where ∇ℒMSE refers to the MSE between the predicted y′ and true y; then the weights are 
adjusted to optimize the accuracy of the binary classification.
Training and evaluation of BioMapAI for ME/CFS BioMapAI:: 
DeepMECFS. BioMapAI is a framework designed to connect highdimensional, sparse 
biological omics matrix X to multi-output Y. Although BioMapAI is not tailored to a 
specific disease, it is versatile and applicable to a broad range of biomedical topics. In this 
study, we trained and validated BioMapAI using our ME/CFS datasets. The trained models 
are available on GitHub, nicknamed DeepMECFS, for the benefit of the ME/CFS research 
community.
To ensure uniform learning for each output y, it is crucial to address sample imbalance 
before fitting the framework. We recommend using customized sample imbalance handling 
methods, such as the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE), adaptive 
Xiong et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

synthetic (ADASYN) or random undersampling (RUS)67. In our ME/CFS dataset, there 
is a significant imbalance, with the patient data being twice the size of the control data. To 
effectively manage this class imbalance, we used RUS as a random sampling method for the 
majority class. Specifically, we randomly sampled the majority class 100 times. For each 
iteration i, a different random subset Si
majority was used. This subset Si
majority of the majority class 
was combined with the entire minority class Sminority. For each iteration i:
Si
majority ⊆Smajority, Sminority = Sminority
Si = Si
majority ∪Sminority
where the combined dataset Si was used for training at each iteration. This approach allows 
the model to generalize better and avoid biases towards the majority class, improving overall 
performance.
Model training, cross-validation and held-out validation. DeepMECFS is the name 
of the trained BioMapAI model with ME/CFS datasets. We trained on five preprocessed 
omics datasets, reporting DeepMECFS-Species for species abundances (feature n = 118, 
sample n = 441), DeepMECFS-KEGG for KEGG gene abundances (feature n = 3, 959, 
sample n = 441) from the microbiome, DeepMECFS-Metabolome for plasma metabolome 
(feature n = 730, sample n = 376), DeepMECFS-Immune for immune profiling (feature 
n = 311, sample n = 451) and DeepMECFS-Quest for blood quest lab measurements (feature 
n = 48, sample n = 465). Additionally, an integrated omics profile was created by merging 
the most predictive features from each omics model related to each clinical score (SHAP, 
Methods), forming a comprehensive matrix of 154 features, comprising 50 immune features, 
32 species, 30 KEGG genes and 42 plasma metabolites. The trained omics model is named 
DeepMECFS-Omics.
To evaluate the performance of BioMapAI, we used a 10-fold cross-validation alongside 
a held-out validation approach. Specifically, 10% of the data was excluded from the cross-
validation process to serve as an independent validation set. This allowed us to assess both 
the model’s performance during cross-validation and its prediction accuracy on unseen data. 
Training was conducted over 500 epochs with a batch size of 64 and a learning rate of 
0.0005, optimized through grid search. The Adam optimizer was used to adjust the weights 
during training, chosen for its ability to handle sparse gradients on noisy data. The initial 
learning rate was set to 0.0005, with beta1 set to 0.9, beta2 set to 0.999, and epsilon set to 
1e-7 to ensure numerical stability. Dropout layers with a 50% dropout rate were used after 
each hidden layer to prevent overfitting, and L2 regularization (λ = 0.008) was applied to the 
kernel weights, defined as:
Lreg = λ
2 ∑
i = 1
N
wi
2
Xiong et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To evaluate the performance of the models, we used several metrics tailored to both 
regression and classification tasks. The MSE was used to evaluate the performance of the 
reconstruction of each object. For each yi, MSE was calculated as:
MSEi = 1
N ∑
j = 1
N
yi
j −yi
j 2, i = 1, 2, …, n
where yi
j is the actual values, yi
j is the predicted values, and N is the number of samples, n is 
the number of objects. For binary classification tasks (ME/CFS versus control), we utilized 
multiple metrics including accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, AUC and area under the 
precision-recall curve to enable a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s performance.
To benchmark the performance of BioMapAI, we compared its binary classification 
performance with four traditional machine learning models and one DNN model. The 
traditional machine learning models included logistic regression (C = 0.5, saga solver 
with Elastic Net regularization); generalized linear modeling with elastic net regularization 
(Glmnet) (grid search for best alpha/lambda, tuneLength = 10) - R glmnet, caret; 
Glmnet with interaction terms (Glmnet-int) - R glmnet, caret; SVM with an RBF kernel 
(C = 2, parameters were selected using grid search with GridSearchCV from scikit-
learn) - sklearn.svm.SVC; and gradient-boosting decision trees (learning rate = 0.05, 
maximum depth = 5, estimators = 1000, parameters were selected using grid search 
with GridSearchCV from scikit-learn) - sklearn.ensemble. GradientBoostingClassifier. DNN 
model used the same hyperparameters as BioMapAI, except it did not include the parallel 
sublayer, Z3; thus it only performed binary classification instead of multi-output predictions. 
The comparison between BioMapAI and DNN aims to assess the specific contribution of the 
spread-out layer, designed for discerning object-specific patterns, in binary prediction. For 
fair comparisons among models, all traditional ML models was trained and evaluated on the 
exact same training datasets, test datasets and held-out datasets as DeepMECFS. Evaluation 
metrics are detailed in Supplementary Table 3.
For hyperparameter tuning of BioMapAI, we conducted a systematic hyperparameter tuning 
procedure to optimize BioMapAI’s performance on 12 symptom-specific clinical outcomes 
and disease status (ME/CFS versus control) using the training dataset, leaving the held-out 
dataset remained completely separate. Our goal was to balance predictive accuracy, model 
complexity, and generalizability across high-dimensional omics datasets. The results of our 
tuning experiments are illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1. We began with a base BioMapAI 
architecture consisting of two shared hidden layers (each with 128 nodes), no dropout, no L2 
penalty and training for 1,000 epochs.
We first investigated how varying the number of shared hidden layers (1, 2, 3 or 4) affected 
both clinical score prediction (MSE) and disease classification (accuracy). As shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 1a, two shared hidden layers achieved the best predictive performance.
Next, we performed a grid search over learning rates {0.01,0.00 
1,0.0005,0.0001,0.00005,0.00001} and batch sizes {32,64,128}. We trained each 
Xiong et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

configuration for 1,000 epochs using the Adam optimizer. Supplementary Fig. 1b 
(heatmaps) displays the MSE for each of the 12 clinical scores at different combinations 
of learning rate and batch size. A learning rate of 0.0005 and batch size 64 emerged as the 
optimal balance, yielding stable training curves and minimal variance across folds. Although 
we initially trained for 1,000 epochs, we observed that validation metrics consistently 
stabilized by around 500 epochs. To prevent overfitting and reduce computational burden, 
we introduced early stopping at 500 epochs in subsequent experiments.
We then tuned the number of neurons in each of the two shared hidden layers. 
Configurations tested included {256,128,64,32,16,8} for the first and the second layer. As 
shown in Supplementary Fig. 1c, whereas the 128–64 setting performed similarly to other 
higher-width combinations, we observed that 64–32 minimized overfitting risk yet retained 
predictive accuracy. Thus, we selected 64 neurons in the first shared layer and 32 in the 
second.
To further mitigate overfitting in the hidden layers, we examined dropout rates 
{0.1,0.2,0.5,0.8}. Supplementary Fig. 1c demonstrates that 0.5 offered the best overall 
balance. We therefore used a 50% dropout after each shared layer. Lastly, we tested 
L2 penalty strengths λ ∈{0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.008, 0.001, 0.0001}. A moderate penalty of 
λ = 0.008 was selected (Supplementary Fig. 1e).
Our final chosen hyperparameters include: Two shared hidden layers with sizes 64 and 
32, each followed by a ReLU activation and 50% dropout; Batch size = 64, 500 epochs 
with early stopping; An Adam optimizer (initial learning rate = 0.0005, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, 
ε = 1 × 10−7), L2 penalty λ = 0.008. We observed that the model’s overall performance 
(MSE on symptom scores, accuracy for ME/CFS classification) was not highly sensitive 
to small deviations in these hyperparameters. Even with the baseline configuration (128 
nodes, no dropout, no penalty), the predictive performance was reasonable; however, this 
final tuned setup led to an improvement of approximately 5–10% and yielded more stable 
and generalizable outcomes across the five omics datasets.
Sensitivity analyses of BioMapAI. For sensitivity analysis of BioMapAI, we first 
re-trained our final BioMapAI configuration ten times with different random initializations. 
Classification metrics and regression metrics (MSE) for the twelve clinical outcomes were 
collected. As shown in Supplementary Table 2, the standard deviations were minimal 
(<5%) across these ten runs, indicating that BioMapAI is robust to changes in random 
seed initialization. We also evaluated three similarly performing model architectures (chosen 
based on grid search results) that yield near-identical or slightly different loss values: model 
1: 128 nodes in the first shared layer, 32 nodes in the second shared layer, λ = 0.008; model 
2: 32 nodes in the first shared layer, 32 nodes in the second shared layer, λ = 0.008; model 3: 
64 nodes in the first shared layer, 32 nodes in the second shared layer, λ = 0.005. As shown 
in Supplementary Table 2, whereas minor fluctuations in classification performance were 
observed, the results were genernally consistent. This underscores BioMapAI’s stability: 
adjusting the number of neurons in the shared layers or slightly altering the L2 penalty 
does not substantially degrade classification or regression outcomes. Collectively, these 
Xiong et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

analyses confirm that BioMapAI’s core design is not overly sensitive to small architectural 
or regularization variations. Even when trained with alternative hyperparameter settings, the 
model yields consistent performance on both classification (ME/CFS versus control) and 
symptom severity score learning.
External validation with independent dataset. To validate BioMapAI’s abilities in 
binary classification, we used four external cohorts17-20 comprising more than 100 samples. 
For these external cohorts, only binary classification is available. A detailed summary of 
data collection for these cohorts is provided in Supplementary Table 6. For each external 
cohort, we processed the raw data (if available) using our in-house pipeline. The features 
in the external datasets were aligned to match those used in BioMapAI by reindexing the 
datasets. The overlap between the features in the external dataset and BioMapAI’s feature 
set was calculated to determine feature coverage. Any missing features were imputed with 
zeros to maintain consistency across datasets. The input data were then standardized as 
BioMapAI. We loaded the pre-trained BioMapAI, gradient-boosting decision tree and DNN 
for comparison. Logistic regression and SVM were excluded because they did not perform 
well during the in-cohort training process. The performance of the models was evaluated 
using the same binary classification evaluation metrics. Evaluation metrics detailed in 
Supplementary Table 3.
BioMapAI decode module SHAP. BioMapAI is designed to be explainable, ensuring 
that it not only reconstructs and makes predictions but also is interpretable, which is 
particularly crucial in the biological domain. To achieve this, we incorporated SHAP into 
our framework. SHAP offers a consistent measure of feature importance by quantifying the 
contribution of each input feature to the model’s output68.
We applied SHAP to BioMapAI to interpret the results, following these three steps:
1. Model reconstruction. BioMapAI’s architecture includes two shared hidden layers (Z1, 
Z2) and one parallel sublayer (Zi
3) for each object yi. To decode the feature contributions for 
each object yi, we reconstructed sub-models from single comprehensive model:
Modeli = Z1 + Z2 + Zi
3, i = 1, 2, …, n
where n is the number of learned objects.
2. SHAP Kernel Explainer. For each reconstructed model, Modeli, we used the SHAP 
Kernel Explainer to compute the feature contributions. The explainer was initialized with the 
model’s prediction function and the input data X:
explaineri = shap.KernelExplainer (Modeli . predict, X), i = 1, 2, …, n
Then, SHAP values were computed to determine the contribution of each feature to yi:
Xiong et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ϕi = explaineri(X), i = 1, 2, …, n
The kernel explainer is a model-agnostic approach that approximates SHAP by evaluating 
the model with and without the feature of interest and then assigning weights to these 
evaluations to ensure fairness. For each Modeli, with each feature j:
ϕi
j(f, x) =
∑
Si ⊆Ni\{j}
∣Si ∣!(m −∣Si ∣−1)!
m!
(Modeli(Si ∪j) −Modeli(Si))
= 1
m
∑
Si ⊆Ni\{j}
m −1
m −∣Si ∣−1
−1
(Modeli(Si ∪j) −Modeli(Si)), i = 1, 2, …, n
where n is the number of learned objects, m is the total number of features, ϕi
j is the Shapley 
value for feature j in Modeli, Ni is the full set of features in Modeli, Si is the subset of features 
not including feature j, Modeli(Si) is the model prediction for the subset Si. The SHAP value 
matrix, ϕi, were further reshaped to align with the input data dimensions.
3. Feature vategorization. Analyzing the SHAP value matrices, [ϕ1, ϕ2, …, ϕn] , features 
can be roughly assigned to two categories: shared features (important to all outputs) or 
specific features (specifically important to individual outputs). We set the cutoff at 75%, 
where features consistently identified as top contributors in 75% of the models were 
classified as shared important features, termed disease-specific biomarkers. Features that 
were top contributors in only a few models were classified as specific important features, 
termed symptom-specific biomarkers.
By reconstructing individual models, Modeli, for each object, yi, and applying SHAP 
explainer individually, we effectively decoded the contributions of input features to 
BioMapAI’s predictions. This method allowed us to categorize features into shared 
and specific categories—termed as disease-specific and symptom-specific biomarkers—
providing unique interpretations of the omics feature contribution to clinical symptoms.
Interaction types of important features included:
Linear (monotonic) relationship. A feature x and a symptom y follow a roughly linear (or 
strictly monotonic) trend when the change in y can be approximated by a single slope 
over x’s range. Formally, y ≈α + βx, with β ≠0, implying a consistently increasing (β > 0) 
or decreasing (β < 0) trend. Biologically, as the biomarker goes up, the symptom steadily 
increases (positive β) or decreases (negative β).
A biomarker x relates to a symptom y through a two-phase pattern or biphasic relationship, 
such as a U-shaped or inverted U-shaped curve. One way to represent this is by including a 
squared term: y ≈α + β1x + β2x2, with β2 ≠0. Biologically, this often reveals that both very 
low and very high biomarker values are associated with greater symptom severity, whereas 
moderate values relate to reduced severity (or vice versa).
Xiong et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Dispersed relationship. If there is no single coherent shape (linear or otherwise) that 
describes the biomarker–symptom relationship across all individuals. Instead, contributions 
may appear sparse (affecting only a small subset of participants) or highly variable with no 
dominant pattern. Biologically, this is a typical relationship at KEGG profile in our case, 
where different individuals can exhibit different directions or magnitudes of effect, leading 
to scattered or ‘patchy’ patterns.
To the stability of SHAP values under repeated experiments and similar model 
configurations, we conducted re-ran the same data with the same architecture (different 
random seeds) as above. We then computed the standard deviation of the SHAP values 
for each feature. Over 90% of features exhibit less than 3% variation in their SHAP 
contributions across runs, indicating that the top features remain highly consistent despite 
random seed variation.
We also computed SHAP values for each of the three alternative model architectures (model 
1, model 2, model 3) described above. Despite their slight architectural or regularization 
differences, the top 50 features identified by SHAP largely overlapped with those from 
the final BioMapAI. Although some lower-ranked features did differ across models, those 
changes accounted for less than 5% of the total SHAP variance, suggesting that the core 
set of important predictors remains stable. Consequently, the minor variations observed are 
unlikely to affect clinical interpretation or downstream analyses. In summary, both random 
initializations and small architectural changes do not substantially alter the SHAP-based 
feature importance patterns in Bio-MapAI. The top features remain consistent, reinforcing 
the reliability and interpretability of our multi-output DL framework.
Packages and tools. BioMapAI was constructed by Tensor-flow(v2.12.0) and 
Keras(v2.12.0). ML models were from scikit-learn(v 1.1.2), Glmnet models were using R 
package glmnet69 (v4.1-4) and caret70 (v6.0.93).
Usage of BioMapAI. We have included our GitHub README.md file and introduced 
a Jupyter notebook for user instruction. Because there are limited large-scale multi-omics 
datasets with sufficient matched clinical data for us to test BioMapAI’s prediction accuracy, 
we have not trained BioMapAI on other disease states. However, BioMapAI’s specialized 
DNN structured with two shared general layers and one outcome-focused parallel layer 
should be generalizable and scalable to other cohort studies that aim to utilize omics data 
for a range of outputs (for example, not just limited to clinical symptoms). For instance, 
researchers could employ our model to link whole-genome sequencing data with blood 
or protein measurements. Constructed to automatically adapt to any input matrix and any 
output matrix, BioMapAI defaults to parallelly align specific layers for each output.
WGCNA and network analysis
To identify co-expressed patterns of each omics, we used WGCNA using the WGCNA71 
package in R. The analysis was performed on preprocessed omics data (Methods): 
species abundances (feature n = 373, sample n = 479) and KEGG gene abundances (feature 
n = 4, 462, sample n = 479) from the microbiome, plasma metabolome (feature n = 395, 
Xiong et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

sample n = 414), immune profiling (feature n = 311, sample n = 489). Network construction 
and module detection involved choosing soft-thresholding powers tailored to each dataset: 
6 for species, 7 for KEGG, 5 for immune, and 6 for metabolomic. The adjacency 
matrices were transformed into topological overlap matrices to reduce noise and spurious 
associations. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the topological overlap matrices, 
and modules were identified using the dynamic tree cut method with a minimum module 
size of 30 genes. Module eigengenes were calculated, and modules with highly similar 
eigengenes (correlation >0.75) were merged. Moduletrait relationships were assessed by 
correlating module eigengenes with clinical traits, and gene significance and module 
membership were used to identify hub genes within significant modules.
Network analysis was conducted using igraph72 in R. Module eigengenes from the 
WGCNA analysis were extracted for each dataset. A combined network was constructed 
by calculating Spearman correlation coefficients (corrected, Methods) between the module 
eigengenes of different datasets, and an adjacency matrix was created based on a threshold 
of 0.3 (absolute value) to include only significant associations. Network nodes represented 
module eigengenes and edges represented significant correlations. Degree centrality and 
betweenness centrality were calculated to identify highly connected and influential nodes. 
Networks in patient subgroups were displayed as the correlation differences from their 
healthy counterparts to exclude the influence of covariates. For example, correlations in 
female patients were compared with female healthy, and correlations in older patients were 
compared with older healthy.
Statistical analysis
Dimensionality reduction was performed using PCoA, implemented via the 
sklearn.manifold.MDS function in Python, applied separately to each omics dataset. For 
integrated analysis across omics layers, PCoA was applied to the combined module 
eigengenes obtained from WGCNA.
Differential abundance or expression analysis of microbial species, genes, immune cell 
populations, and metabolites was conducted across patient subgroups (short-term vs. control, 
long-term vs. control, and all patients vs. control). Group comparisons were carried out 
using the two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple 
hypothesis testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR method unless otherwise specified.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients were computed using the scipy.stats.spearmanr 
function in Python. All correlation tests were two-sided, and corresponding P values 
were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Holm–Bonferroni method. To estimate 
uncertainty in correlation estimates, 95% confidence intervals were calculated via 
bootstrap resampling (1,000 iterations). For each bootstrap iteration, random sampling with 
replacement was performed, and the Spearman correlation was recomputed; confidence 
bounds were defined as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the resulting distribution.
Statistical significance was annotated as follows: **P ≤ 0.001, *P ≤ 0.01, P ≤ 0.05, and n.s. 
(not significant) for P > 0.05.
Xiong et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Longitudinal analysis
To capture statistically meaningful temporal signals, we employed various statistical and 
modeling methods, accounting for both linear and nonlinear trends and intraindividual 
correlations:
1.
IQR and intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). We initially assessed statistics 
at different time points by computing the IQR and ICC. Data were standardized 
to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one to ensure comparability across 
features with different scales. The IQR quantified variability, whereas the ICC 
assessed the dependence of repeated measurements73, indicating the similarity of 
measurements over time. Data showed no statistical dependence and no trend of 
stable variance across time points.
2.
Generalized linear models (GLMs). Generalized linear models74 were then 
used to analyze the effects of time points, considering age, gender and their 
interactions. Time points were included as predictors to reveal changes in 
dependent variables over time, with interaction terms exploring variations based 
on age and gender. Random effects accounted for intraindividual correlations. 
Although 12 features out of 5,000 showed weak trends over time (slopes < 0.2), 
they were not deemed sufficient to be potential longitudinal biomarkers, possibly 
due to individualized patterns.
3.
Repeated measures correlation (rmcorr). To better consider individual effects, we 
employed rmcorr75 to assess consistent patterns of association within individuals 
over time. This method captured stable within-individual associations across 
different time points. However, only 30 features out of 5,000 showed weak 
slopes (<0.3), and these were not considered sufficient to conclude the presence 
of longitudinal signals.
4.
Smoothing spline ANOVA (SS-ANOVA). We then considered the longitudinal 
trends could be nonlinear and more complex. To model complex, nonlinear 
relationships between response variables and predictors over time, SS-ANOVA76 
was used. SS-ANOVA uncovered nonlinear trends and interactions in the omics 
data, but no strong temporal signals were identified.
In conclusion, analysis of the longitudinal data, accounting for both linear and nonlinear 
trends and intraindividual correlations, revealed the difficulty in extracting strong and 
statistically meaningful temporal signals. As ME/CFS is a disease that usually lasts for 
decades with nonlinear progression, the 4-year tracking period with annual measurements is 
likely insufficient for capturing consistent temporal signals, necessitating longer follow-up 
periods.
In short, we observed that each patient exhibited independent patterns at each time point 
in both omics data and clinical symptoms (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1). Based on 
these findings, we included each time point as an independent data point in BioMapAI. We 
applied this approach to increase the effective sample size, allowing the model to better 
capture associations between omics data and clinical symptoms.
Xiong et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1 ∣. Data Pairedness Overview and Heterogeneity in Healthy and Patients.
a, Cohort Composition and Data Collection. Over four years, 515 time points were 
collected: baseline year from all 249 donors (Healthy N=96, ME/CFS N=153); second year 
from 168 individuals (Healthy N=58, ME/CFS N=110); third year from 94 individuals 
(Healthy N=13, ME/CFS N=81); fourth year from N=4 ME/CFS patients. Clinical metadata 
and blood measures were collected at all 515 points. Immune profiles from PBMCs 
were recorded at 489 points, microbiome data from stool samples at 479 points, and 
plasma metabolome data at 414 points. A total of 1,471 biosamples were collected. b-c, 
Heterogeneity of b, Healthy Controls and c, All Patients in Symptom Severity and 
omics Profiles. Supplemental information for Fig. 1b, which shows examples from 20 
patients. Variability in symptom severity (top) and omics profiles (bottom) for all healthy 
controls and all patients with 3-4 time points. The top x-axis numbers represent 12 
Xiong et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

symptoms, arranged in the same order as Extended Data Fig. 1f, g (left to right, top to 
bottom). d, Distribution of 12 Clinical Symptoms in ME/CFS and Control. Density plots 
compare the distributions of 12 clinical scores between control (blue) and ME/CFS patients 
(orange) with the x-axis represents the values of symptom severity (scaled from 0%, no 
symptom, to 100%, most severe) and the y-axis represents the frequency (count) of data 
points. e, Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA) of each ‘Omics. PCoA based on Bray-
Curtis distance. Control samples (blue) and ME/CFS patients (red) show distinct clustering. 
Here, except for the clinical scores, controls are indistinguishable from patients, highlighting 
the difficulty of building classification models. f-g, Symptom Progression Over Time in 
f, Healthy vs. g, ME/CFS Patients. Symptom progression for each individual (represented 
by different colors) is shown using line plots of symptom severity (y-axis) over time points 
(years 1–4). Compared to healthy controls, ME/CFS patients exhibit higher severity, greater 
heterogeneity, and inconsistent or nonlinear progression (indicated by substantial variation 
over time without a consistent pattern) in clinical symptoms. Related to: Figs. 1-2.
Xiong et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 2 ∣. BioMapAI’s Performance at Clinical Score Reconstruction and Disease 
Classification.
a, Density map of True vs. Predicted Clinical Scores. Supplemental information for 
Fig. 2b, which shows three examples. Here, the full set of 12 clinical scores compares 
the true score, y (Column 1), against BioMapAI’s predictions generated from different 
omics profiles – yimmune, yspecies, yKEGG, ymetabolome, yquest, yomics (Columns 2–7). b, Scatter Plot of 
True vs. Predicted Clinical Scores. Scatter plots display the relationship between true 
clinical scores (x-axis) and predicted clinical scores (y-axis) for six different models: Omics, 
Immune, Species, KEGG, Metabolome, and Quest Labs. Each plot demonstrates the clinical 
score prediction accuracy for each model. c, ROC Curve for Disease Classification with 
Original Clinical Scores. The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve evaluates 
the performance of disease classification using the original 12 clinical scores. The mean 
Area Under the Curve (AUC) is 0.99, indicating high prediction accuracy, which aligns with 
Xiong et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the clinical diagnosis of ME/CFS based on key symptoms. d, 3D t-SNE Visualization of 
Hidden Layers. 3D t-SNE plots show how BioMapAI progressively distinguishes disease 
from control across hidden layers for five trained ‘omics models: Immune, KEGG, Species, 
Metabolome, and Quest Labs. Each plot uses the first three principal components to 
show the spatial distribution of control samples (blue) and ME/CFS patients (red). The 
progression from the input layer (mixed groups) to Hidden Layer 3 (fully separated groups) 
illustrates how BioMapAI progressively learns to separate ME/CFS from healthy controls. 
Related to: Fig. 2.
Extended Data Fig. 3 ∣. Disease-Specific Biomarkers - Top 10 Biomarkers Shared across Clinical 
Symptoms and Multiple Models.
Through the top 30 high-ranking features for each score, we discovered that the most 
critical features for all 12 symptoms were largely shared and consistently validated across 
ML and DL models, particularly the foremost 10. Here, this multi-panel figure presents 
the top 10 most significant features identified by BioMapAI across five omics profiles, 
highlighting their importance in predicting clinical symptoms and diagnostic outcomes 
across BioMapAI, DNN, and GBDT models, along with their data prevalence. Each vertical 
section represents one omics profile, with columns of biomarkers ordered by average 
feature importance from right to left. From top to bottom: 1. Heatmap of SHAP Values 
from BioMapAI. This heatmap shows averaged SHAP values with the 12 scores on the 
rows and the top 10 features in the columns. Darker colors indicate a stronger impact 
on the model’s output; Consistency among the top 5 features suggests they are shared 
disease biomarkers crucial for all clinical symptoms; 2. Swarm Plot of SHAP Values from 
DNN. This plot represents the distribution of feature contributions from DNN, which is 
structurally similar to BioMapAI but omits the third hidden layer (Z3). SHAP values are 
plotted vertically, ranging from negative to positive, showing each feature’s influence on 
prediction outcomes. Points represent individual samples, with color gradients denoting 
actual feature values. For instance, Dysosmobacteria welbionis, identified as the most 
critical species, shows that greater species relative abundance correlates with a higher 
likelihood of disease prediction; 3. Bar Graphs of Feature Importance in GBDT. GBDT 
is another machine learning model used for comparison. Each bar’s height indicates 
a feature’s significance within the GBDT model, providing another perspective on the 
Xiong et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

predictive relevance of each biomarker; 4. Heatmap of Normalized Raw Abundance Data. 
This heatmap compares biomarker prevalence between healthy and disease states, with 
colors representing z-scored abundance values, highlighting biomarker differences between 
groups. Supporting Materials: Extended Data Table 3. Related to: Fig. 3.
Extended Data Fig. 4 ∣. Symptom-Specific Biomarkers - Immune, KEGG and Metabolome 
Models.
By linking omics profiles to clinical symptoms, BioMapAI identified unique symptom-
specific biomarkers in addition to disease-specific biomarkers (Extended Data Fig. 3). 
Each omics has a circularized diagram (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 4b-d) to display 
how BioMapAI use this omics profile to predict 12 clinical symptoms and to discuss the 
contribution of disease- and symptom-specific biomarkers. Detailed correlation between 
symptom-specific biomarkers and their corresponding symptoms is in Extended Data 
Fig. 5. a, Examples of Sleeping Problem-Specific Species’ and Gastrointestinal-
Xiong et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Specific Species’ Contributions. Supplemental information for Fig. 3d, which shows the 
contribution of pain-specific species. b-d, Circularized Diagram for Immune, KEGG 
and Metabolome Models. Supplemental information for Fig. 3a, which shows the species 
model. e-f, Zoomed Segment for Pain in KEGG and Metabolome Model. Supplemental 
information for Fig. 3b, which shows the zoomed segment for pain in the species and 
immune models. *Note, the reported biomarkers were calculated using the entire dataset and 
were not validated on held-out data. Abbreviations and Supporting Materials: Extended 
Data Fig. 5. Related to: Fig. 3.
Extended Data Fig. 5 ∣. Symptom-Specific Biomarkers - Different Correlation Patterns of 
Biomarkers to Symptom.
Supplemental information for Fig. 3c, which shows six pain biomarkers from multiple 
models. Here for each omics (a-d, Immune, Species, KEGG, Metabolome), we plotted 
the correlation of symptom-specific biomarkers (x-axis) to its related symptom (y-axis), 
Xiong et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

colored by SHAP value (contribution to the symptom). P value by two-sided spearman 
correlation, FDR adjusted (Detailed statistics in Supplementary Table 5). Abbreviations: 
CD4, Cluster of Differentiation 4; CD8, Cluster of Differentiation 8; IFNg, Interferon 
Gamma; DC, Dendritic Cells; MAIT, Mucosal-Associated Invariant T; Th17, T helper 17 
cells; CD4+ TCM, CD4+ Central Memory T cells; DC CD1c+ mBtp+, Dendritic Cells 
expressing CD1c+ and myelin basic protein; DC CD1c+ mHsp, Dendritic Cells expressing 
CD1c+ and heat shock protein; CD4+ TEM, CD4+ Effector Memory T cells; CD4+ Th17 
rfx4+, CD4+ T helper 17 cells expressing RFX4; F. prausnitzii, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii; 
A. communis, Akkermansia communis; NAD, Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide. Related 
to: Fig. 3.
Extended Data Fig. 6 ∣. omics WGCNA Modules and Host-Microbiome Network.
Xiong et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Correlation of WGCNA Modules with Clinical Metadata. Weighted Gene Co-
expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) was used to identify co-expression modules for 
each omics layer: species, KEGG, immune, and metabolome. The top dendrograms show 
hierarchical clustering of ‘omics features, with modules identified. The bottom heatmap 
shows the relationship of module eigengenes (colored as per dendrogram) with clinical 
metadata – including demographic information and environmental factors - and 12 clinical 
scores. General linear models were used to determine the primary clinical drivers for 
each module, with the color gradient representing the coefficients (red = positive, blue = 
negative). Microbial modules were influenced by disease presence and energy-fatigue levels, 
while metabolome and immune modules correlated with age and gender. b-c, Microbiome-
Immune-Metabolome Network in b, Patient and c, Healthy Subgroups. Supplemental 
information for Fig. 4a (Healthy Network) and 4b (Patient Subgroups). Figure 4a is the 
healthy network; here, Extended Data Fig. 6b presented the shifted correlations in all 
patients. Figure 4b represented the network in patient subgroups; here, Extended Data Fig. 
6c is the corresponding healthy counterpart, for example, female patients were compared 
with female controls to exclude gender influences. d, Differences in Host-Microbiome 
Correlations between Healthy and Patient Subgroups. Selected host–microbiome module 
pairs are grouped on the x-axis (for example, pyruvate to blood modules, steroids to gut 
microbiome). Significant positive and negative correlations (top and bottom y-axis) of 
module members pairs are shown as dots for each subgroup (blue = healthy, orange = 
patient) (Spearman, adjusted p < 0.05), from left to right: Young, Elder, Female, Male, 
NormalWeight, OverWeight Healthy and Young, Elder, Female, Male, NormalWeight, 
OverWeight Patient. The middle bars represent the total count of associations. This panel 
highlights the shifts in host–microbiome networks from health to disease, for example, in 
patients, the loss of pyruvate to host blood modules correlation and the increase of INFg+ 
CD4 memory correlation with gut microbiome. Related to: Fig. 4.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful to the Oh, Unutmaz and Li laboratories for inspiring discussions and acknowledge the contribution 
of the Genome Technologies Service at The Jackson Laboratory for expert assistance with sample sequencing for 
the work described in this publication. We also thank the clinical support team at the Bateman Horne Center and all 
the individuals who participated in this study. This work was funded by 1U54NS105539. R.X., E.A., R.C., S.D.V., 
L.K., C.G., L.B., D.U. and J.O. were funded by 1U54NS105539. J.O. is additionally supported by the NIH (1 R01 
AR078634-01, DP2 GM126893-01, 1 U19 AI142733, 1 R21 AR075174).
Data availability
All individual-level data supporting the findings of this study are publicly available. 
The complete dataset used in this study, including clinical metadata (including 
demographic information), immune profiles, plasma metabolomics, Quest Diagnostics 
blood measurements, and processed microbiome data, is available on GitHub: https://
github.com/ohlab/BioMapAI/blob/main/data/Omics_Dataset.zip. Raw gut metagenomic 
Xiong et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

sequencing data have been deposited in BioProject: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
bioproject/PRJNA1125469.
Code availability
BioMapAI framework and user guide is available at https://github.com/ohlab/BioMapAI. All 
original code, processed data and trained model of this study has been deposited at Github.
References
1. Ruiz-Pablos M, Paiva B, Montero-Mateo R, Garcia N & Zabaleta A. Epstein-Barr virus and the 
origin of myalgic encephalomyelitis or chronic fatigue syndrome. Front. Immunol 12, 656797 
(2021). [PubMed: 34867935] 
2. Su R. et al. The TLR3/IRF1/type III IFN axis facilitates antiviral responses against enterovirus 
infections in the intestine. mBio 11, e02540–20 (2020). [PubMed: 33203755] 
3. Anderson DE et al. Lack of cross-neutralization by SARS patient sera towards SARS-CoV-2. Emerg 
Microbes Infect. 9, 900–902 (2020). [PubMed: 32380903] 
4. Cairns R & Hotopf M. A systematic review describing the prognosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Occup. Med. Oxf. Engl 55, 20–31 (2005).
5. Cortes Rivera M, Mastronardi C, Silva-Aldana CT, Arcos-Burgos M & Lidbury BA Myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive review. Diagnostics 9, 91 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31394725] 
6. Hare PJ, LaGree TJ, Byrd BA, DeMarco AM & Mok WWK Single-cell technologies to study 
phenotypic heterogeneity and bacterial persisters. Microorganisms 9, 2277 (2021). [PubMed: 
34835403] 
7. Zeeshan S, Xiong R, Liang BT & Ahmed Z. 100 years of evolving gene–disease complexities and 
scientific debutants. Brief. Bioinform 21, 885–905 (2020). [PubMed: 30972412] 
8. Poenaru S, Abdallah SJ, Corrales-Medina V & Cowan J. COVID-19 and post-infectious 
myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a narrative review. Ther. Adv. Infect. Dis 
8, 20499361211009385 (2021). [PubMed: 33959278] 
9. Reuken PA et al. Longterm course of neuropsychological symptoms and ME/CFS after SARS-
CoV-2-infection: a prospective registry study. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci 274, 1903–1910 
(2024). [PubMed: 37587244] 
10. Bretherick AD et al. Typing myalgic encephalomyelitis by infection at onset: a DecodeME study. 
NIHR Open Res. 3, 20 (2023). [PubMed: 37881452] 
11. Bae J & Lin J-MS Healthcare utilization in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(ME/CFS): analysis of US ambulatory healthcare data, 2000–2009. Front. Pediatr 7, 185 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31139604] 
12. Zheng Y & Zhu Z. Editorial: retrieving meaningful patterns from big biomedical data with 
machine learning approaches. Front. Genet 14, 1177996 (2023). [PubMed: 37007948] 
13. Leelatian N. et al. Unsupervised machine learning reveals risk stratifying glioblastoma tumor cells. 
eLife 9, e56879 (2020). [PubMed: 32573435] 
14. Su Q. et al. The gut microbiome associates with phenotypic manifestations of post-acute 
COVID-19 syndrome. Cell Host Microbe 32, 651–660 (2024). [PubMed: 38657605] 
15. Bourgonje AR, van Goor H, Faber KN & Dijkstra G. Clinical value of multiomics-based 
biomarker signatures in inflammatory bowel diseases: challenges and opportunities. Clin. Transl. 
Gastroenterol 14, e00579 (2023). [PubMed: 36881831] 
16. Marcos-Zambrano LJ et al. Applications of machine learning in human microbiome studies: a 
review on feature selection, biomarker identification, disease prediction and treatment. Front. 
Microbiol 12, 634511 (2021). [PubMed: 33737920] 
17. Guo C. et al. Deficient butyrate-producing capacity in the gut microbiome is associated with 
bacterial network disturbances and fatigue symptoms in ME/CFS. Cell Host Microbe 31, 288–304 
(2023). [PubMed: 36758522] 
Xiong et al.
Page 36
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

18. Raijmakers RPH et al. Multi-omics examination of Q fever fatigue syndrome identifies similarities 
with chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Transl. Med 18, 448 (2020). [PubMed: 33243243] 
19. Germain A. et al. Plasma metabolomics reveals disrupted response and recovery following 
maximal exercise in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight 7, e157621 
(2023).
20. Che X. et al. Metabolomic evidence for peroxisomal dysfunction in myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci 23, 7906 (2022). [PubMed: 35887252] 
21. Liñares-Blanco J, Fernandez-Lozano C, Seoane JA & López-Campos G. Machine learning based 
microbiome signature to predict inflammatory bowel disease subtypes. Front. Microbiol 13, 
872671 (2022). [PubMed: 35663898] 
22. He F. et al. Development and external validation of machine learning models for diabetic 
microvascular complications: cross-sectional study with metabolites. J. Med. Internet Res 26, 
e41065 (2024). [PubMed: 38546730] 
23. Mora-Ortiz M, Trichard M, Oregioni A & Claus SP Thanatometabolomics: introducing NMR-
based metabolomics to identify metabolic biomarkers of the time of death. Metabolomics 15, 37 
(2019). [PubMed: 30834988] 
24. Balasubramanian R. et al. Metabolomic profiles associated with all-cause mortality in the 
Women’s Health Initiative. Int. J. Epidemiol 49, 289–300 (2020). [PubMed: 31651959] 
25. Li H, Ren M & Li Q. 1H NMR-based metabolomics reveals the intrinsic interaction of age, plasma 
signature metabolites, and nutrient intake in the longevity population in Guangxi, China. Nutrients 
14, 2539 (2022). [PubMed: 35745269] 
26. Kondoh H & Kameda M. Metabolites in aging and aging-relevant diseases: frailty, sarcopenia and 
cognitive decline. Geriatr. Gerontol. Int 24, 44–48 (2024). [PubMed: 37837183] 
27. Peng S, Shen Y, Wang M & Zhang J. Serum and CSF metabolites in stroke-free patients are 
associated with vascular risk factors and cognitive performance. Front. Aging Neurosci 12, 193 
(2020). [PubMed: 32774300] 
28. Duerler P, Vollenweider FX & Preller KH A neurobiological perspective on social influence: 
serotonin and social adaptation. J. Neurochem 162, 60–79 (2022). [PubMed: 35274296] 
29. Pomrenze MB, Paliarin F & Maiya R. Friend of the Devil: negative social influences driving 
substance use disorders. Front. Behav. Neurosci 16, 836996 (2022). [PubMed: 35221948] 
30. Laslett A-M Empirical and conceptual paradigms for studying secondary impacts of a person’s 
substance use. Addiction 117, 3148–3149 (2022). [PubMed: 36216593] 
31. Carco C. et al. Increasing evidence that irritable bowel syndrome and functional gastrointestinal 
disorders have a microbial pathogenesis. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol 10, 468 (2020). [PubMed: 
33014892] 
32. Saffouri GB et al. Small intestinal microbial dysbiosis underlies symptoms associated with 
functional gastrointestinal disorders. Nat. Commun 10, 2012 (2019). [PubMed: 31043597] 
33. Liang S, Wu X, Hu X, Wang T & Jin F. Recognizing depression from the microbiota–gut–brain 
axis. Int. J. Mol. Sci 19, 1592 (2018). [PubMed: 29843470] 
34. Zhu F, Tu H & Chen T. The microbiota–gut–brain axis in depression: the potential 
pathophysiological mechanisms and microbiota combined antidepression effect. Nutrients 14, 
2081 (2022). [PubMed: 35631224] 
35. Topan R & Scott SM Sleep: an overlooked lifestyle factor in disorders of gut-brain interaction. 
Curr. Treat. Options Gastroenterol 21, 435–446 (2023).
36. Moens de Hase E. et al. Impact of metformin and Dysosmobacter welbionis on diet-induced 
obesity and diabetes: from clinical observation to preclinical intervention. Diabetologia 67, 333–
345 (2024). [PubMed: 37897566] 
37. Amabebe E, Robert FO, Agbalalah T & Orubu ESF Microbial dysbiosis-induced obesity: role 
of gut microbiota in homoeostasis of energy metabolism. Br. J. Nutr 123, 1127–1137 (2020). 
[PubMed: 32008579] 
38. Kavanagh P. et al. Tentative identification of the phase I and II metabolites of two synthetic 
cathinones, MDPHP and α-PBP, in human urine. Drug Test. Anal 12, 1442–1451 (2020). 
[PubMed: 32621389] 
Xiong et al.
Page 37
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

39. Lenoir M. et al. Butyrate mediates anti-inflammatory effects of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii in 
intestinal epithelial cells through Dact3. Gut Microbes 12, 1–16 (2020).
40. Sokol H. et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium 
identified by gut microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci 105, 16731–
16736 (2008). [PubMed: 18936492] 
41. Monteiro CRAV et al. In vitro antimicrobial activity and probiotic potential of Bifidobacterium and 
Lactobacillus against species of Clostridium. Nutrients 11, 448 (2019). [PubMed: 30795551] 
42. Nguyen-Lefebvre AT, Selzner N, Wrana JL & Bhat M. The hippo pathway: a master regulator of 
liver metabolism, regeneration, and disease. FASEB J. 35, e21570 (2021). [PubMed: 33831275] 
43. Kim C-S Roles of diet-associated gut microbial metabolites on brain health: cell-to-cell 
interactions between gut bacteria and the central nervous system. Adv. Nutr 15, 100136 (2024). 
[PubMed: 38436218] 
44. Rebeaud J, Peter B & Pot C. How microbiota-derived metabolites link the gut to the brain during 
neuroinflammation. Int. J. Mol. Sci 23, 10128 (2022). [PubMed: 36077526] 
45. Ahmad S. et al. Gut microbiome-related metabolites in plasma are associated with general 
cognition. Alzheimers Dement. 17, e056142 (2021).
46. Ahmed Z, Zeeshan S, Xiong R & Liang BT Debutant iOS app and gene-disease complexities in 
clinical genomics and precision medicine. Clin. Transl. Med 8, e26 (2019).
47. Xiong R. et al. Multi-omics of gut microbiome-host interactions in short- and long-term myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Cell Host Microbe 31, 273–287 (2023). 
[PubMed: 36758521] 
48. Sweetman E. et al. Current research provides insight into the biological basis and diagnostic 
potential for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Diagnostics 9, 73 
(2019). [PubMed: 31295930] 
49. Hamine S, Gerth-Guyette E, Faulx D, Green BB & Ginsburg AS Impact of health chronic disease 
management on treatment adherence and patient outcomes: a systematic review. J. Med. Internet 
Res 17, e3951 (2015).
50. Derman ID et al. High-throughput bioprinting of the nasal epithelium using patient-derived nasal 
epithelial cells. Biofabrication 15, 044103 (2023).
51. Fleming E. et al. Cultivation of common bacterial species and strains from human skin, oral, and 
gut microbiota. BMC Microbiol. 21, 278 (2021). [PubMed: 34649516] 
52. Trivedi MS et al. Identification of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome-associated 
DNA methylation patterns. PLoS ONE 13, e0201066 (2018). [PubMed: 30036399] 
53. Bouquet J. et al. Whole blood human transcriptome and virome analysis of ME/CFS patients 
experiencing post-exertional malaise following cardiopulmonary exercise testing. PLoS ONE 14, 
e0212193 (2019). [PubMed: 30897114] 
54. Caruana EJ, Roman M, Hernández-Sánchez J & Solli P. Longitudinal studies. J. Thorac. Dis 7, 
E537–E540 (2015). [PubMed: 26716051] 
55. Aurora C, Cecilia A & Adina H. The role of diet in the treatment of chronic diseases case study. 
ARS Med. Tomitana 27, 153–156 (2021).
56. Therrien R & Doyle S. Role of training data variability on classifier performance and 
generalizability. In Medical Imaging 2018: Digital Pathology Vol. 10581, 58–70 (SPIE, 2018).
57. Krumina A. et al. Clinical profile and aspects of differential diagnosis in patients with ME/CFS 
from Latvia. Med. (Mex.) 57, 958 (2021).
58. Zubcevik N. et al. Symptom clusters and functional impairment in individuals treated for Lyme 
borreliosis. Front. Med 7, 464 (2020).
59. Lathan C, Spira JL, Bleiberg J, Vice J & Tsao JW Defense automated neurobehavioral assessment 
(DANA)-psychometric properties of a new field-deployable neurocognitive assessment tool. Mil. 
Med 178, 365–371 (2013). [PubMed: 23707818] 
60. Resnick HE & Lathan CE From battlefield to home: a mobile platform for assessing brain health. 
mHealth 2, 30 (2016). [PubMed: 28293603] 
Xiong et al.
Page 38
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

61. Lee J. et al. Hemodynamics during the 10-minute NASA Lean Test: evidence of circulatory 
decompensation in a subset of ME/CFS patients. J. Transl. Med 18, 314 (2020). [PubMed: 
32799889] 
62. Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/ChronicFatigue Syndrome, 
Board on the Health of Select Populations, & Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness (National Academies Press, 
2015).
63. 36-Item Short Form Survey (SF-36) Scoring Instructions. RAND Health Care https://
www.rand.org/health-care/surveys_tools/mos/36-item-short-form/scoring.html (1992).
64. Blanco-Míguez A. et al. Extending and improving metagenomic taxonomic profiling with 
uncharacterized species using MetaPhlAn 4. Nat. Biotechnol 41, 1633–1644 (2023). [PubMed: 
36823356] 
65. Edgar RC Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinformatics 26, 2460–
2461 (2010). [PubMed: 20709691] 
66. Love MI, Huber W & Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014). [PubMed: 25516281] 
67. Saripuddin M, Suliman A, Syarmila Sameon S & Jorgensen BN Random undersampling on 
imbalance time series data for anomaly detection. In Proc. 2021 4th International Conference 
on Machine Learning and Machine Intelligence 151–156 (Association for Computing Machinery, 
2022).
68. Lundberg S & Lee S-I A Unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Preprint at 10.48550/
arXiv.1705.07874 (2017).
69. Friedman JH, Hastie T & Tibshirani R. Regularization paths for generalized linear nodels via 
coordinate descent. J. Stat. Softw 33, 1–22 (2010). [PubMed: 20808728] 
70. Kuhn M. Building predictive models in R using the caret package. J. Stat. Softw 28, 1–26 (2008). 
[PubMed: 27774042] 
71. Langfelder P & Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. 
BMC Bioinformatics 9, 559 (2008). [PubMed: 19114008] 
72. Antonov M, et al. igraph enables fast and robust network analysis across programming languages. 
Preprint at 10.48550/arXiv.2311.10260 (2023).
73. Koo TK & Li MY A guideline of selecting and reporting intraclass correlation coefficients for 
reliability research. J. Chiropr. Med 15, 155–163 (2016). [PubMed: 27330520] 
74. Nelder JA & Wedderburn RWM Generalized linear models. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. Gen 135, 370–384 
(1972).
75. Bakdash JZ & Marusich LR Repeated measures correlation. Front. Psychol 8, 456 (2017). 
[PubMed: 28439244] 
76. Gu C. Smoothing Spline ANOVA Models: R Package gss (Springer, 2013).
Xiong et al.
Page 39
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1 ∣. Cohort summary and heterogeneity of ME/CFS.
a, Cohort design and omics profiling. 96 healthy donors and 153 patients with ME/CFS 
were followed over 3 to 4 years with yearly sampling. Clinical metadata including 
lifestyle and dietary surveys, blood clinical laboratory measures (n = 503), gut microbiome 
(n = 479), plasma metabolome (n = 414) and immune profiles (n = 489) were collected 
(Supplementary Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1a). Created in BioRender. Xiong, 
R. (2025) https://BioRender.com/adqusn8. b, Heterogeneity and nonlinear progression of 
ME/CFS in symptom severity and omics profiles. This section highlights variability in 
symptom severity (top) and omics profiles (bottom) for 20 representative patients with 
ME/CFS over three to four time points. Top: symptom severity is shown for 12 major 
clinical symptoms (x axis, with each column representing one symptom) against severity 
scores (scaled from 0% (no symptom) to 100% (most severe), y axis) for each patient 
(each represented by a distinct color). Lines indicate average severity, and shaded areas 
represent the severity range across time points (controls shown in Extended Data Fig. 1b). 
For ME/CFS symptomatology, b (top) highlights substantial heterogeneity over time, as 
shown by the widespread shaded areas. Extended Data Fig. 1f,g further confirms the absence 
of consistent temporal patterns, with symptom severity fluctuating considerably over time. 
Notably, among the 12 symptoms, trends differed: fatigue (symptom 1) remains consistently 
severe over years, whereas emotional dysregulation (symptom 8) exhibits notable variability 
and instability over time (Extended Data Fig. 1g). Bottom: PCoA of integrated omics data. 
The background gray dots represent the entire cohort, defining the overall range of variation 
in the PCoA space. Colored dots highlight omics-level heterogeneity, with each set of 
same-colored dots corresponding to an individual’s different time points. The spread and 
overlap of the colored space reflect the diversity in omics signatures of patients versus the 
more consistent pattern typical of controls (Extended Data Fig. 1c).
Xiong et al.
Page 40
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 2 ∣. BioMapAI’s model structure and performance.
a, BioMapAI’s structure. BioMapAI is a fully connected DNN composed of an input layer 
(X), a normalization layer, three sequential hidden layers (Z1, Z2, Z3), and one output 
layer (Y). Hidden layer Z1 (64 nodes) and hidden layer Z2 (32 nodes) feature a dropout 
ratio of 50% to prevent overfitting. Hidden layer 3 has 12 parallel sublayers, each with 
8 nodes (Z3 = [z1
3, z2
3, …, z12
3 ]) to learn 12 objects in the output layer (Y = [y1, y2, …, y12]) 
representing key clinical symptoms of ME/CFS. In total, we used six inputs (X): five 
individual omics and one merged omics integrating the most important features. Created 
in BioRender. Xiong, R. (2025) https://BioRender.com/v9fnv0r. b, True versus predicted 
clinical scores highlight BioMapAI’s accuracy. Three example density maps (full set, 
Extended Data Fig. 2a) compare the true score, y (Column 1) against BioMapAI’s 
predictions generated from different omics. y axis represents the diversity along the x axis 
for each omics. Color gradient from blue (lower density) to red (higher density) illustrates 
Xiong et al.
Page 41
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the occurrence frequency, with dashed lines indicating key statistical percentiles. c, Omics’ 
strengths in symptom prediction. Each of the 12 axes represents a clinical score output 
(Y = [y1, y2, …, y12]), with five colors denoting the omics datasets used for model training. The 
spread of each color along an axis reflects the 1 – normalized mean square error (MSE) 
(Supplementary Table 2) between the actual, y, and the predicted, y, outputs, illustrating 
the predictive strength or weakness of each omics for specific clinical scores. The radial 
scale ranges from 0.8 (center) to 1.0 (outer circle), where values closer to the outer edge 
correspond to lower MSE and better predictions. d, BioMapAI’s performance in healthy 
versus disease classification (10-fold cross-validation and held-out data). ROC curves show 
BioMapAI’s performance in disease classification using each omics dataset separately 
or combined (‘Omics’), with the AUC in parentheses showing prediction accuracy (full 
report in Supplementary Table 3). The dashed line represents a baseline for comparison. 
e, Validation of BioMapAI with external cohorts. External cohorts with microbiome 
data (Guo17, Raijmakers18) and metabolome data (Germain19, Che20) were used to test 
BioMapAI’s model, underscoring its prediction accuracy (detailed classification matrix, 
Supplementary Table 3).
Xiong et al.
Page 42
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 3 ∣. BioMapAI identifies both disease- and symptom-specific biomarkers.
a,b, For symptom-specific biomarkers, circularized diagram of species model (a) with 
zoomed segment for pain (b). Each circular panel illustrates how the model predicts 12 
symptom-specific biomarkers derived from one omics (all data in Extended Data Fig. 4); 
x axis represents individuals. The reported biomarkers were not validated on held-out 
data. From top to bottom: 1. variance explained by biomarker categories (gradients of 
dark green (100%) to white (0%) show variance explained by the model); 2. aggregated 
SHAP values quantify the contribution of each feature to the model’s predictions (disease-
specific biomarkers in gray and symptom-specific in purple); 3. demography and cohort 
classification (cohort (controls, white versus patients, black); age <50 years (white) versus 
>50 (black); sex (male, white vs. female, black)); 4. true versus predicted scores show 
BioMapAI’s predictive performance at the individual sample level (true in blue and model-
predicted scores in orange); 5. examples of symptom-specific biomarkers (line graphs show 
the contribution of select symptom-specific biomarkers to the model across individuals). 
Peaks above 0 (middle line) indicate positive and below 0 for negative. c, Different 
correlation patterns of biomarkers to symptoms. For pain (see also Extended Data Fig. 
5), correlation analysis of raw abundance (x axis) with pain score (y axis) show monotonic 
(for example, CD4 memory and DC CD1c+ markers), biphasic (microbial and metabolomic 
markers) or sparse (KEGG genes) contributions. Dots represent an individual color-coded 
to SHAP value, where the color spectrum indicates negative (blue) to neutral (gray) to 
positive (red) contributions to pain prediction. Superimposed trend lines with shaded error 
bands represents the predicted correlation trends. Adjacent bar plots represent the data 
distribution. P value by two-sided Spearman correlation, FDR adjusted (detailed statistics 
Xiong et al.
Page 43
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in Supplementary Table 5). d,e, Examples of pain-specific species (d) and immune (e) 
biomarkers’ contributions. SHAP waterfall plots illustrate the contribution of individual 
features to predictive output. The top 10 features are shown here, illustrating the species 
and the immune model (additional examples in Extended Data Fig. 4a). The contribution of 
each feature is shown as a step, and the cumulative effect of all the steps provides the final 
prediction value, E[f(X)].
Xiong et al.
Page 44
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 4 ∣. Microbiome-immune-metabolome crosstalk is dysbiotic in ME/CFS.
a,b, Microbiome-immune-metabolome network in healthy (a) and patient (b) subgroups. A 
baseline network was established with 200+ healthy control samples (a), bifurcating into 
two segments: the gut microbiome (species in yellow, genetic modules in orange) and blood 
elements (immune modules in green, metabolome modules in purple). Nodes: modules; 
size: number of members; colors: omics type; edges: interactions between modules, with 
Spearman coefficient (adjusted) represented by thickness, transparency and color—positive 
(red) and negative (blue). Here, key microbial pathways (pyruvate, amino acid and benzoate) 
interact with immune and metabolome modules in healthy individuals. Specifically, these 
correlations were disrupted in patient subgroups (b), as a function of gender, age (young 
<26 years versus older >50 years), BMI (normal <26 versus overweight >26) and health 
status (individuals with IBS or infections). Correlations significantly shifted from healthy 
counterparts (Extended Data Fig. 6c) are highlighted with colored nodes and edges 
Xiong et al.
Page 45
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

indicating increased (red) or decreased (blue) interactions. c, Targeted microbial pathways 
and host interactions. Four microbial metabolic mechanisms were analyzed to compare 
control, short- and long-term patients with ME/CFS, and external cohorts for validation 
(Guo17 and Raijmakers18) along with their associated host immune/metabolome modules. 
1. Microbial pathway fold change: key genes were grouped and annotated in subpathways. 
Circle size: fold change over control; color: increase (red) or decrease (blue), P values 
(patient versus control, P value by two-sided Wilcoxon, FDR adjusted; detailed statistics 
in Supplementary Table 8) marked. 2. Microbiome–host interactions: Sankey diagrams 
visualize interactions between microbial pathways and host immune cells/metabolites. Line 
thickness and transparency: Spearman coefficient (adjusted); color: red (positive), blue 
(negative). 3. Immune and metabolites fold change: pathway-correlated immune cells and 
metabolites are grouped by category. 4. Contribution to disease symptoms: stacked bar 
plots show accumulated SHAP values (contributions to symptom severity) for each disease 
symptom (1–12, as in Supplementary Table 1). Colors: microbial subpathways and immune/
metabolome categories match module color in fold change maps. x axis: accumulated 
SHAP values (contributions) from negative to positive, with the most contributed symptoms 
highlighted. P values: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
Xiong et al.
Page 46
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 5 ∣. Overview of dysbiotic host–microbiome interactions in ME/CFS.
This conceptual diagram visualizes the host–microbiome interactions in healthy conditions 
(left) and its disruption and transition into the disease state in ME/CFS (right). The base 
icons of the figure remain consistent, whereas gradients and changes in color and size 
visually represent the progression of the disease. Process of production and processing is 
represented by lines with arrows, where the color indicates an increase (red) or decrease 
(blue) in the pathway in disease; lines without arrows indicate correlations, with red 
representing positive and blue representing negative correlations. In healthy conditions, 
microbial metabolites support immune regulation, maintaining mucosal integrity and healthy 
inflammatory responses by positively regulating Treg and Th22 cell activity, and controlling 
Th17 activities, including the secretion of IL-17 (purple cells), IL-22 (blue) and IFN-
γ. These microbial metabolites also maintain many positive interactions with plasma 
metabolites like lipids, bile acids, vitamins and phenols. In ME/CFS, there is a significant 
decrease in beneficial microbes and a disruption in metabolic pathways, marked by a 
decrease in the butyrate (brown-red dots) and BCAA (yellow) pathways and an increase in 
tryptophan (green) and benzoate (red) pathways. These changes are linked to gastrointestinal 
issues. In ME/CFS, the regulatory capacity of the immune system diminishes, leading to 
the loss of health-associated interactions with Th17, Th22 and Treg cells, and an increase 
in inflammatory immune activity. Pathogenic immune cells, including CD8 MAIT and 
γδT cells, show increased activity, along with the secretion of inflammatory cytokines 
such as IFN-γ and GzmA, contributing to worsened general health and social functioning. 
Healthy interactions between gut microbial metabolites and plasma metabolites weaken or 
even reverse in the disease state. A notable strong connection increased in ME/CFS is 
benzoate transformation to hippurate, associated with emotional disturbances, sleep issues, 
and fatigue. Created in BioRender. Xiong, R. (2025) https://BioRender.com/cje1xlx.
Xiong et al.
Page 47
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
