Academic Editor: Marco Fiore
Received: 7 February 2026
Revised: 27 April 2026
Accepted: 28 April 2026
Published: 30 April 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Review
Imbalance of Excitatory and Inhibitory Neurotransmitter
Systems in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome
Klaus J. Wirth 1,* and Carmen Scheibenbogen 2
1
Mitodicure GmbH, 65830 Kriftel, Germany
2
Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany
*
Correspondence: klaus@mitodicure.com
Abstract
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) and post-COVID-19 syn-
drome share a symptom profile, including severe fatigue, cognitive dysfunction, exertional
intolerance, sleep disturbances, hypervigilance, and the paradoxical state of being “wired
but tired.” A well-established finding is sympathetic hyperactivity with reduced vagal
tone, typically interpreted as autonomic nervous system dysfunction. Emerging evidence,
however, suggests a broader disturbance across multiple neurotransmitter systems. This
paper reviews current knowledge on neurotransmitter systems implicated in ME/CFS and
Long COVID, focusing on potential mechanisms of dysregulation and their roles in disease
pathology and symptom generation, as well as implications for treatment. In addition
to abnormalities of the noradrenergic system, disturbances in serotonergic, GABAergic,
and glutamatergic signaling have been reported. Contributing factors may include au-
toimmunity, neuroinflammation, gut dysbiosis, epigenetic influences, and stressors such
as orthostatic intolerance, metabolic strain, and pain. A shift favoring excitatory over
inhibitory neurotransmission can lead to excessive neural activation, autonomic dysfunc-
tion, sensory hypersensitivities, sleep disturbances, and cognitive impairment. Reduced
GABAergic tone combined with increased glutamatergic and noradrenergic activity may
elevate skeletal muscle tone, contributing to calcium overload, mitochondrial dysfunction,
exertional intolerance, and post-exertional malaise. Various pharmacological treatments
may partially rebalance these neurotransmitter systems, but limited efficacy highlights the
need for systematic investigation and individualized strategies.
Keywords: Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS); Long
COVID; neurotransmitter imbalance; autonomic dysfunction; noradrenaline; GABA;
glutamate; serotonin; hypersensitivities
1. Introduction
Among the key symptoms of fatigue, disturbed cognitions, and exertional intolerance
with post-exertional malaise (PEM), Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
(ME/CFS) patients commonly show sympathetic hyperactivity, sleep disturbances, non-
restorative sleep and nocturnal hypervigilance and the feeling of overstimulation despite
profound fatigue [1]. This paradox is described by “wired but tired”. Long COVID shares
many symptoms and findings with ME/CFS and a subset of patients fulfill the diagnostic
criteria for ME/CFS [2].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
2 of 17
Sympathetic hyperactivity, reduced vagal tone, and an impaired sympathovagal bal-
ance have long been recognized, indicating disturbances in noradrenergic and cholinergic
signaling [3–14]. In recent years, growing evidence suggests that additional neurotransmit-
ter systems are also affected. In this paper, we review the current evidence of neurotrans-
mitter disturbances in ME/CFS and Long COVID and compiled the findings. We provide
evidence that the dysregulation of neurotransmitters may extend beyond the disturbed
sympathetic–vagal balance and involve multiple neurotransmitter systems. This broader
imbalance of neurotransmitters could favor excitatory over inhibitory signaling, causing
CNS overstimulation that can contribute to autonomic dysfunction, sensory hypersensitivi-
ties, cognitive impairment, and skeletal muscle pathology. In the second part of this paper,
we try to explain how these neurotransmitter dysregulations could drive disease pathology
and explain core symptoms and complaints.
It is important to consider that autonomic dysfunction may arise, at least in part, as a
consequence of the underlying neurotransmitter imbalance, while additional mechanisms
are likely involved. Furthermore, once fully developed, ME/CFS may further exacerbate
these neurochemical disturbances. Physiologically, the interplay of excitatory and inhibitory
systems determines overall activity levels, closely tied to the sleep–wake cycle. In ME/CFS,
this state-dependent balance appears disturbed both during the day and at night.
Our deeper analysis of neurotransmitter disturbances is motivated by two findings
unrelated to the sympathetic nervous system and its transmitter noradrenaline. First, a recent
study identified several new autoantibodies, including one against serine/arginine repetitive
matrix protein 3 (SRRM3), which is linked to the GABA system [15,16]. Notably, a single
nucleotide variant in SRRM3 has been associated with ME/CFS, implicating dysfunctional
SRRM3, which may disrupt GABA-related splicing and impair GABAergic signaling in
disease pathophysiology [17] (Supplementary Table S1). Supporting this notion, a recent
magnetic resonance study has reported elevated glutamate levels in ME/CFS, consistent
with an imbalance of the glutamatergic–GABAergic neurotransmission [18]. Second, several
studies have reported reduced tryptophan levels in ME/CFS and Long COVID, that could
lower the availability of this precursor for the synthesis of serotonin. Together, these findings
suggest that the GABAergic and serotonergic systems may also be disturbed.
Prompted by these insights, we systematically reviewed the literature for further poten-
tial disturbances in major neurotransmitter systems, focusing on excitatory (noradrenaline,
histamine, glutamate, and dopamine) and inhibitory or modulatory neurotransmitters
(GABA, serotonin, and vagal acetylcholine). We would like to emphasize that, apart from
sympathetic hyperactivity, the evidence for disturbances of other neurotransmitters is
still scarce and requires further research. Nevertheless, there are sufficient indications
to seriously consider the possibility that an imbalance of the main neurotransmitter sys-
tems beyond the well-known disturbance of the sympathetic–parasympathetic axis may
contribute to and potentially even play a causal role in the initiation of the disease.
Consistent with the assumptions of disturbed neurotransmitters, a range of pharma-
cological interventions targeting these neurotransmitters have been applied empirically in
ME/CFS. Although no large-scale clinical trials have demonstrated efficacy, several drugs
show beneficial effects in subsets of patients: clonidine and beta-blockers (noradrenaline mod-
ulation), vagal activation procedures and pyridostigmine (effects on vagal and sympathetic
first ganglion), serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), aripiprazole (presumably dopamine
receptor modulation), antihistamines, dextromethorphan or memantine (NMDA-glutamate
receptor modulation), and benzodiazepines (GABAergic activation), and presumably also
low-dose naltrexone (LDN), as will be explained below. Collectively, these interventions seem
to reflect a therapeutic strategy of rebalancing disturbed neurotransmitter systems, although
these drugs are not administered with this explicit therapeutic concept.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
3 of 17
The causes of these neurotransmitter disturbances may involve immune dysregulation
(autoantibodies, neuroinflammation, and mast cell overactivity), genetic predisposition,
epigenetic regulation, and gut dysbiosis, which will be discussed in the following sections
on the single neurotransmitters. These factors may create a vulnerability to developing
ME/CFS following infection. Once ME/CFS is fully established, it seems to further aug-
ment and aggravate the neurotransmitter disturbances and autonomic dysfunction. Table 1
gives an overview of the main neurotransmitters and their localization and function. We
would like to emphasize that not all neurotransmitters need to be equally affected in every
patient. While disturbances in the sympathetic–vagal axis of GABA and serotonin signaling
appear relatively pronounced, other systems might also be altered, although the extent
of their contribution is currently unclear. Nevertheless, together these disturbances could
contribute to the overall imbalance of neurotransmitters in ME/CFS.
Table 1. Overview of neurotransmitters, their receptors, main locations, and key functions.
Neurotransmitter
Effect
Receptors
Main Locations
Key Functions
Glutamate
Excitatory (main CNS
excitatory
transmitter)
Ionotropic: NMDA,
AMPA, Kainate
Metabotropic: mGluR
(I–III)
Widely distributed in
CNS (cortex,
hippocampus,
cerebellum)
Synaptic plasticity,
learning and memory,
motor control, sensory
processing
Noradrenaline
Mainly excitatory
α1, α2, β1, β2,
β3-adrenergic
Locus coeruleus,
widespread CNS
projections; peripheral
sympathetic nerves
Arousal, attention,
stress response, mood,
blood pressure
regulation
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Excitatory or
inhibitory
(receptor-dependent)
Nicotinic (ionotropic).
Muscarinic (M1–M5)
(metabotropic)
Neuromuscular
junction, autonomic
nervous system, basal
forebrain
Muscle contraction,
memory and learning,
autonomic control
Histamine
Excitatory/
modulatory
H1, H2, H3, H4
Hypothalamus
(tuberomammillary
nucleus), peripheral
Wakefulness, attention,
appetite control,
immune responses
GABA
(γ-aminobutyric acid)
Inhibitory
GABA-A (ionotropic,
Cl−), GABA-B
(metabotropic),
GABA-C
Brain and spinal cord
Inhibitory control,
anxiety regulation,
sleep, muscle tone
Glycine
Inhibitory
Glycine receptor
(ionotropic, Cl−),
Co-agonist at NMDA
receptors
Spinal cord, brainstem
Motor and sensory
inhibition, reflex
control, NMDA
receptor modulation
Serotonin (5-HT)
Mostly inhibitory/
modulatory
5-HT1–7 (mostly
metabotropic; 5-HT3
ionotropic)
Raphe nuclei,
widespread CNS
Mood, sleep, appetite,
pain modulation,
emotional regulation
2. Disturbances of the Neurotransmitter Systems in ME/CFS
2.1. Noradrenergic System
Sympathetic hyperactivity, reflected by altered heart rate variability, has been shown in
numerous publications in ME/CFS [3–7]. It is primarily driven by increased noradrenergic
activity. Nocturnal hypervigilance, sleep disturbances, and the feeling of overstimulation
may result from an overactive noradrenergic system, in which the locus coeruleus plays a
central role. Another consistent observation is reduced vagal activity [3,8–12], indicating a
clear imbalance between noradrenergic and cholinergic vagal signaling [13].
Autoimmunity appears to play a central role in a subset of ME/CFS patients, with
autoantibodies reported against several receptors. The best-studied autoantibodies to date are
those against β2AdR, with higher levels correlating with symptom severity and structural
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
4 of 17
alterations in the central nervous system [19,20]. A recent study identified autoantibodies
targeting, among others, the α1-adrenergic and α2C-adrenergic receptors [16]. Autoantibod-
ies against the α1- and α2-receptors may contribute to orthostatic dysfunction, indirectly
activating the noradrenergic system via orthostatic stress. In contrast, antibodies against the
α2C-receptor could also directly increase noradrenergic activity by enhancing noradrenaline
release from sympathetic neurons and nerve endings [21]. Indeed, antibody levels against
a1- and a2-receptors were found to be significantly associated with the severity of autonomic
dysfunction and fatigue [16,22]. In post-COVID-19 syndrome patients, autoantibodies against
angiotensin II receptor type 1/2, against adrenoceptor beta 1/2, against muscarinic acetyl-
choline receptor M1/M3, and against C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 3 (CXCR3ab) were
associated with altered parasympathetic and sympathetic tone [23].
Noradrenergic activity may also rise if catecholamine metabolism is impaired.
Some studies showed that ME/CFS is associated with genetic variations in catechol-O-
methyltransferase (COMT), the main enzymes degrading catecholamines [24,25], but could
not be confirmed by others [26,27]. An epigenetic investigation, however, reported about
double the DNA methylation in the MB-COMT promoter region seen in healthy con-
trols, and this was considered an independent factor contributing to the symptoms and
pathophysiology of ME/CFS with concomitant fibromyalgia [26]. Decreased expression
of COMT would enhance the activity of both noradrenaline and dopamine (discussed
below) and thus contribute to the neurotransmitter imbalance. These factors may represent
risk conditions that, under stress, disturb the balance between excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmitter systems. An open question is whether DNA methylation of COMT is a
primary or secondary event.
Stress is a major pathogenic factor in ME/CFS. Most patients suffer from orthostatic
intolerance and reduced cerebral blood flow, and in Long COVID this has been shown to
be prevalent already early in the disease course [28–30]. Orthostatic dysfunction causes or-
thostatic stress, further activating the sympathetic system. Additional stressors—metabolic
strain from poor skeletal muscle energetic situation, respiratory stress, pain, and psychosocial
stress—likely stimulate the system. The expected sympathetic hyperactivity, hyper-alert
state, and nocturnal hypervigilance are consistent with enhanced excitatory noradrenergic
influences. However, surprising findings require deeper consideration: A recent study reports
elevated resting heart rates but diminished heart rate response during physical activity in
individuals with post-COVID-19 ME/CFS symptoms [31]. In a group of patients with post-
infection ME/CFS, DOPA and metabolites of dopamine and noradrenaline in cerebrospinal
fluid were decreased [32]. Levels of noradrenaline and dopamine did not differ compared
with healthy controls, while sympathetic tone was found raised in the same patients as in
many other studies. Resting heart rate was found higher but peak heart rate was lower in the
cardiopulmonary exercise test in this paper. A systematic review and meta-analysis found
adrenergic dysfunction in patients with ME/CFS. The authors concluded that higher baseline
adrenaline levels and atypical responses to exercise in ME/CFS indicate sympathetic dysfunc-
tion and adrenergic abnormalities [14]. There is no easy answer to these partly conflicting
findings. A conclusion is that the noradrenergic system must be dysregulated. But how?
High sympathetic tone with tachycardia as in ME/CFS cannot be reconciled with cerebral
catecholamine depletion. Experimental catecholamine depletion by reserpine causes among
other effects, bradycardia, a decrease in blood pressure, hypothermia, and sedation [33].
Alpha2-adrenergic agonists like clonidine and dexmedetomidine that inhibit noradrenaline
release by activating the presynaptic alpha2-adrenergic autoreceptor, cause bradycardia, and
are even used for sedation clearly demonstrating the effects of decreased noradrenaline avail-
ability at its postsynaptic receptor [34]. ME/CFS patients cannot sleep, show tachycardia,
often have subfebrile temperature, are usually not depressive, and are “wired”. These contra-
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
5 of 17
dictory findings can be reconciled by the assumption that Locus Coeruleus is permanently
overstimulated by stressors. Such permanent stimulation requires much energy; however,
supply is impaired due to malperfusion and disturbed neurovascular coupling [35–38]. As a
result, Locus Coeruleus may be unable to recover fully, leading to an inadequate sympathetic
and adrenergic response for exercise and for orthostatic regulation. The possibility should also
be considered that the ability of the noradrenergic and adrenergic system to appropriately
adapt its activity to exercise and orthostatic regulation may further worsen over time and
particularly with increasing disease severity. Orthostatic dysfunction, hypovolemia, and the
poor energetic situation in skeletal muscle (see below) may even require a higher-than-normal
level of sympathetic activation for everyday activities in ME/CFS. In patients with connective
tissue abnormalities and dilated veins due to weakness of the vascular connective tissue, the
noradrenergic stimulation required to maintain adequate cardiac preload when standing and
to further increase it during exercise is likely higher than normal. Contractile stimulation,
however, may even be lower due to a disturbed noradrenergic system (too high at rest—too
low on demand). The finding that patients with ME/CFS exhibit normal hemodynamics at
rest but a marked reduction in cardiac output during exercise, as demonstrated by invasive
CPET, supports this interpretation [39]. However, a potential contribution of hypovolemia to
the reduced cardiac output should also be considered.
In addition to impaired contraction of capacitance vessels due to insufficient
α-adrenergic stimulation—limiting cardiac preload during orthostatic stress and
exercise—β-adrenergic mechanisms may also be involved. In ME/CFS, β2AdR function
may be compromised by three mechanisms: β2AdRs are particularly prone to desensitiza-
tion, as shown in heart failure and experimental studies [40,41]. (1). In ME/CFS, sustained
sympathetic overactivity may promote β2AdR desensitization. (2) β2AdR autoantibodies
may further impair receptor function. (3) Chronic overstimulation may lead to functional
“exhaustion” of the adrenergic system, thereby limiting its capacity to adequately activate
β2AdR during exercise. Because these receptors are already compromised by the two
mechanisms mentioned, an even greater level of adrenergic stimulation would be required
to achieve normal function for exercise, but adrenergic stimulation may be lower due to
“exhaustion”. Because β2AdRs increase blood flow to skeletal muscle, brain, and heart and
mediate bronchodilation, their dysfunction limits exercise capacity.
Proper function of ß2AdR is not only important with respect to adequate perfusion and
respiration but also for skeletal muscle function. In skeletal muscle not only perfusion, but,
probably even more importantly, stimulation of the Na+/K+-ATPase may be impaired by a
disturbed ß2AdR function [42–44]. This is because during exercise the stimuli of this ion
transporter are ß2AdR and calcitonin-gene-related peptide (CGRP) released from sensory
nerve fibers. CGRP, physiologically released from small sensory nerve fibers, is likely
diminished as soon as small fiber neuropathy has developed. The functional consequences
of a disturbed overall function of ß2AdR for skeletal muscle pathophysiology and exercise
intolerance will be highlighted below in a separate section.
ß2AdRs should be more disturbed than ß1AdRs due to their high sensitivity to desen-
sitization, but an impaired maximal stimulatory capacity of noradrenergic output as argued
above during exercise would also affect and impair the ß1AdR component. What are the
effects of these disturbances on the heart? Chronotropic incompetence during exercise
has been reported which can be fully explained by deficient ß-adrenergic stimulation as
both ß-adrenergic receptor subtypes exert chronotropic effects [45]. Implicating deficient
ß-adrenergic stimulation for causing chronotropic incompetence automatically leads to
the assumption of an impaired inotropy and lusitropy (impaired diastolic relaxation for
adequate cardiac filling) because these actions are also mediated via ßAdR-mediated rise in
cAMP. A paper reported shortening of QTc interval in ME/CFS patients [46], which can
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
6 of 17
only be attributed to dysfunction of ß2AdR because the cardiac action potential is physio-
logically shortened by ß1AdR activation but prolonged by ß2AdR activation [47,48]. This
means both ß-adrenergic receptor subtypes have opposing effects on the action potential
duration (reflected by the QT-time in the ECG). Shortening of the action potential also has a
mild negative inotropic effect forcing down the calcium current and thereby calcium influx
in the heart beyond the direct effect of diminished cAMP on the different mechanisms
involved in cardiac calcium dynamics.
Pyridostigmine, which has been shown to improve orthostatic dysregulation and mus-
cular fatigue in ME/CFS [49,50], can stimulate and amplify sympathetic tone in ME/CFS:
The first ganglia of both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic system are cholinergic
(nicotinic). Raising acetylcholine by inhibition of degradation by pyridostigmine theoretically
can raise the activity of both arms of the autonomic nervous system. Since inhibition of
cholinesterase is an amplifying mechanism, it will particularly raise the activity of the system
that is already centrally activated. It means that, when sympathetic drive starts for exercise
or for orthostatic regulation, pyridostigmine preferentially amplifies sympathetic tone. By
contrast, when central vagal tone is predominant at rest, the vagus nerve becomes more
stimulated. Thus, pyridostigmine can theoretically improve the situation during both exercise
and recovery. Pyridostigmine, which does not penetrate the blood–brain barrier, may have
other favorable effects via enhanced acetylcholine concentrations at the vagal nerve terminals
and as a neuromuscular transmitter that also activates the Na+/K+-ATPase at rest (not during
exercise) [42]. Additionally, the effects of acetylcholine via the α7-nicotinic (α7-nAChR)- and
M3-cholinergic receptors subtype on endothelia cells are considered beneficial [51].
Stress-induced sympathetic activation typically reduces vagal tone. Further impair-
ment may arise from gut dysbiosis, which disturbs the gut–brain axis [52–55]. This axis
largely depends on serotonin release from enterochromaffin cells, linking vagal activity to
serotonergic signaling [56,57]. Thus, a disturbed gut microbiome might therefore weaken
vagal activity. Whether efferent vagal output e.g., to the heart and cardiovascular system, is
influenced by reduced serotonergic afferent vagal input from the gut remains to be demon-
strated, however. Therapeutic interventions that stimulate the vagus nerve or enhance
acetylcholine release may help improve the vagal tone.
Altogether, there is strong evidence that the noradrenergic system is dysregulated—
characterized by elevated activity at rest, but likely insufficient activation during exertion
and possibly impaired orthostatic regulation due to exhaustion.
2.2. Serotonin
Serotonin, a modulatory neurotransmitter, is likely to play a role in ME/CFS, and
there is some evidence suggesting that its levels are reduced in the central nervous sys-
tem. Reduced tryptophan availability—caused by gut dysbiosis [52–55] and diversion of
tryptophan into the kynurenine pathway via increased IDO2 activity—is assumed to cause
decreased serotonin synthesis [58,59]. Several studies show that the amount of tryptophan
in blood is decreased in post-COVID-19 syndrome patients [60–62]. Another possible mech-
anism lowering the level of the serotonin precursor tryptophan is an increased activity by
tryptophan-catabolizing enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO1), which is typically
induced by interferon in viral infections [58].
Levels of serotonin or its metabolite 5-methoxytryptamin in blood are found decreased
or unchanged in post-COVID-19 and ME/CFS patients [63–66]. In another ME/CFS
study, plasma serotonin was not altered in women but significantly reduced in men. The
ratio of tryptophan to serotonin was elevated in patients suggesting lower serotonin
levels according to the authors [67]. Therefore, serum serotonin does not seem to be
a reliable biomarker. Furthermore, serotonin does not cross the blood–brain barrier to
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
7 of 17
act as a neurotransmitter. In the brain, serotonin is generated from tryptophan, such
that tryptophan levels in blood, which are diminished, may be more relevant as a proxy.
Serotonin’s role in stimulating afferent vagal activity in the gut via chromaffin cells through
gut–brain interactions may also affect vagal function in Long COVID and ME/CFS [56,57].
Clinical observations suggest that serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) can provide
some symptomatic relief, supporting the hypothesis of serotoninergic dysregulation in post-
COVID-19 patients [68]. SSRIs were shown to improve fatigue, cognitive impairment, and
hypersensitivity in ME/CFS. Raising serotonin is probably not beneficial in all respects: Post-
COVID-19 syndrome patients are more sensitive to side effects of SSRIs than other patients [68].
Serotonin, particularly in the spinal cord, can raise motor neuron excitability and output via
the 5-HT2 receptor subtype [69–71]. In severe ME/CFS, skeletal muscle membrane is most
likely depolarized and therefore hyperexcitable [72] (discussion below) and serotonin may
have the potential to worsen this aspect of muscle symptomatology. In summary, there is
evidence suggesting a deficit of serotonin in the central nervous system in ME/CFS.
2.3. GABA
Several findings suggest an impairment of the GABAergic system in ME/CFS, which
is the most important inhibitory system in the brain. This impairment may result from
TRPM3 dysfunction as well as from genetic or autoimmune disturbances of SRRM3, a
protein involved in GABA signaling. Both a SNP and autoantibodies against SRRM3
have been found in subsets of patients and linked to ME/CFS, raising the suspicion that
GABAergic signaling could be disturbed [16,17], (Supplementary Table S1). A pilot study
also reported reduced urinary GABA levels [73]. TRPM3 dysfunction has been documented
in natural killer cells, and low-dose naltrexone (LDN) has been shown to restore ion channel
function [74–76]. Since TRPM3 is also expressed in sensory Aδ- and C-fibers and in neurons
of the CNS, where it is involved in the secretion of GABA [77], LDN may indirectly improve
GABAergic signaling in the brain by improving TRPM3 function [78]. This also fits into the
concept of neurotransmitter rebalancing.
GABA plays a critical role not only in sleep regulation but also in skeletal muscle
tone, where it exerts a relaxing effect [79,80]. Conversely, noradrenergic and glutamatergic
activity increases muscle tone. Thus, an imbalance between noradrenaline, glutamate, and
GABA at the muscular level may contribute to ME/CFS muscle pathology [72]. Addi-
tionally, GABA normally counterbalances excitatory glutamate, suggesting that impaired
GABA function could explain observed increases in glutamate (see below in the section on
glutamate). The pathophysiological consequences of an elevated skeletal muscle tone as a
consequence of an imbalance of these neurotransmitters involved in setting the muscle tone
will be discussed below. Benzodiazepines (e.g., lorazepam), which enhance GABA receptor
activity, are one of the most effective treatments for fatigue and sensory hypersensitivity
in ME/CFS; however, their clinical use is limited by the risk of dependency. In summary,
there is strong evidence of diminished GABAergic system activity in ME/CFS.
2.4. Glutamate
Glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, is likely to play a role in ME/CFS. There
is some evidence suggesting that this neurotransmitter system is overactive in ME/CFS.
A recent MRI study reports elevated brain level of glutamate and N-acetyl-aspartate in
the brains of Long COVID and ME/CFS patients [18]. Glutamate is the most important
excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Since GABAergic signaling normally inhibits
glutamatergic activity, reduced GABAergic function could contribute to this increase (see
section on GABA). An increased density of AMPA-type glutamate receptors on the post-
synaptic neural cell surface was found to be associated with cognitive impairment in Long
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
8 of 17
COVID in a recent study using [11C]K-2 PET imaging [81], demonstrating a possible altered
glutamatergic receptor signaling, rather than altered transmitter levels itself. The data
therefore suggests disturbance of the neurotransmitter systems in a broad sense like in the
case of alpha2-C-adrenergic receptors.
There is increasing evidence suggesting a role of neuroinflammation in ME/CFS [82–86].
Low-grade neuroinflammation indicated by cytokines found in cerebrospinal fluid may act
on astrocytes and influence the handling of the neurotransmitters glutamate and GABA [87].
Astrocytes take up 80% of the neuronally released glutamate but only 20% of the released
GABA [88]. Both neurotransmitters are recycled via the astrocytes and returned to the
neurons as glutamine, which, in turn, release glutamate and GABA. Cytokines, generated
in the process of neuroinflammation, are supposed to reduce both glutamate and GABA
uptake in astrocytes. Since astrocytic glutamate uptake is much higher than that of GABA,
the cytokine-induced inhibition of neurotransmitter uptake in astrocytes should result in
an imbalance in favor of glutamate over GABA. This would increase neuronal excitatory
effects of glutamate in the brain [89].
Memantine and Dextromethorphan, which act as NMDA (glutamate) receptor an-
tagonists, have been discussed as potential treatment, although data on their efficacy in
ME/CFS are not available. In an open-label phase II study in patients with Long COVID,
amantadine acting as an NMDA receptor antagonist, among other properties, was associ-
ated with an improvement in fatigue. In contrast, a placebo-controlled trial in patients with
ME/CFS did not demonstrate a significant effect [90,91]. This discrepancy may in part be
explained by poor tolerability of amantadine in ME/CFS patients, potentially related to its
dopaminergic and anticholinergic properties. GABA has crucial inhibitory effects in the
brain directly counteracting the excitatory effects of glutamate. The efficacy of benzodi-
azepines activating the GABA system indirectly supports the notion that dysregulation of
the glutamate receptor plays an important role in disturbing the neurotransmitter balance.
Altogether, there is evidence that the glutaminergic system is overactive in ME/CFS.
2.5. Glycine
In the central nervous system glycine acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in certain
regions of the CNS (e.g., spinal cord, brainstem). In addition, as a co-agonist at the NMDA
receptor, it is involved in glutamatergic signal transmission (excitatory or modulatory).
Glycine can be transported via the blood-brain-barrier by amino acid transporters (ASC
transporter), but quantitatively its generation as a local neurotransmitter in the CNS from
serine via the one-carbon metabolism seems to be by far more important [92]. Serine and
its derivatives sarcosine were found elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid of ME/CFS patients
with a decrease in 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5MTHF) suggesting general dysfunction of
folate and one-carbon metabolism in ME/CFS [93]. Speculatively, this could reduce the
availability of glycine as a local neurotransmitter in the CNS.
2.6. Dopamine
Dopaminergic activity may also be enhanced due to genetic or more likely epigenetic
changes of COMT, such as altered DNA methylation, as explained above [26], reducing
dopamine breakdown and raising its levels, but direct evidence is missing. Clinically, low-
dose aripiprazole, a dopamine receptor modulator, has shown some benefit [94]. Its use at
low doses is consistent with a broader therapeutic concept of neurotransmitter rebalancing.
2.7. Histamine
Histamine is an excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Many Long COVID and
ME/CFS patients show increased mast cell activity. Peripherally, histamine likely contributes
to pathophysiology through vascular effects: (i) inadequate arterial dilation causing blood
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
9 of 17
diversion (“steal phenomenon”), and (ii) venous dilation via H2-receptors reducing venous
contractility and preload (venous pooling) [95]. Hypovolemia due to vascular leakage may
further aggravate these effects. As histamine is unable to cross an intact blood–brain barrier,
mast cells as resident immune cells in the brain must be considered a potential pathological
source of histamine within the central nervous system. Centrally, histamine functions as
an excitatory neurotransmitter, especially in the tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) of the
hypothalamus [96], suggesting a potential role in hyperexcitability. Whether histamine acting
as a central excitatory transmitter contributes to the disease remains to be investigated. An
open question is whether a dysfunctional blood–brain barrier could allow histamine to enter
the brain. A disturbance of the blood–brain barrier has been proposed in ME/CFS and Long
COVID [83,97]. Among the antihistamines, brain-penetrating drugs include diphenhydramine
as a H1-histamine receptor antagonist and cimetidine blocking H2-receptors.
2.8. Summary of the Neurotransmitter Disturbances
We have compiled the available information on potential disturbances of neurotrans-
mitters in ME/CFS beyond the well-known dysregulation of the sympathetic and vagal
system. There are preliminary data supporting the notion that additional neurotransmitter
systems may also be affected, including glutamate, serotonin, and GABA, whereas for
histamine, glycine, and dopamine such indications remain hypothetical.
When these disturbances are considered in a context, they suggest a predominance of
excitatory over inhibitory neurotransmission, leading to central nervous system overacti-
vation that may underlie sympathetic hyperactivity, hypersensitivity, and skeletal muscle
pathology, as illustrated in Figure 1.
 
Figure 1. Proposed multifactorial model linking immune dysregulation, genetic susceptibility, micro-
biome alterations, and stressors to neurotransmitter imbalance, CNS symptoms, autonomic dysfunction,
impaired bioenergetics, and resulting multisystem symptoms, including post-exertional malaise.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
10 of 17
3. Role of Neurotransmitter Imbalance in the Pathophysiology of
ME/CFS and Their Potential Contribution to Typical Symptoms
After presenting the results of our search suggesting a predominance of excitatory
over inhibitory transmitters in ME/CFS, we aim to explain how this neurotransmitter im-
balance could contribute to the typical symptomatology of ME/CFS. These considerations
raise the possibility that ME/CFS symptoms are also influenced to a relevant extent by
disturbed neurotransmitter regulation. The term “neurotransmitter imbalance” implies
that it is most likely not a single neurotransmitter disturbance, but rather the synergistic
interaction of several neurotransmitter disturbances that gives rise to the ME/CFS symp-
tomatology. As outlined earlier, this imbalance could be driven by autoantibodies, mast cell
overactivity, low level neuroinflammation, tryptophan deficiency, genetic predisposition or
epigenetic changes, and exposure to various stressors, with orthostatic stress likely playing
a particularly important role.
Autoantibodies against peripheral neurotransmitter receptors and other structures can
certainly play an important role in the disease pathology in ME/CFS such as antibodies
against β2AdR, alpha1-adrenergic receptors, M3-cholinergic receptors, and the potassium-
dependent sodium-calcium-exchanger NCKX3/ SLC24A3, to name a few [16], but the
disturbance of centrally acting neurotransmitters may be particularly relevant for the
severity of the neurological symptoms, sleep disturbances, and hypersensitivities and may
also influence skeletal muscle pathophysiology, as will be outlined in the following sections.
3.1. Sleep Disturbances, Cognitive Impairment, and Sensory Hypersensitivities
A predominance of excitatory over inhibitory neurotransmitter systems will lead
to sleep disturbances, nocturnal hypervigilance, and brain overstimulation. This obvi-
ously hyper-alert state is associated with overactivation of brain regions that could also
cause sensory and perceptual disturbances and hypersensitivities. As explained in a
recent publication [98], these disturbances may be due to an overactivation of the ante-
rior insula within the salience network, leading to excessive sensitivities. The authors
further explain that this is likely related to the low excitability threshold of the anterior
insula, with excessive stimuli leading to overmobilization of responses in non-threatening
situations [99,100]. In support of these notions, increased activation of the salience net-
work was found in patients with ME/CFS [101]. Therefore, we consider the possibil-
ity that the symptoms involving sensitivity to lights, noises, and smells could be the
result of an overactivation of the anterior insula by excitatory neurotransmitters while
inhibitory influences are impaired. Thus, brain and particularly insula overactivation
could lead to enhanced stimulus uptake in all sensory organs, while stimulus processing
may be impaired because of a reduced global and local cerebral blood flow [35–38]. The
strongly enhanced incoming sensory information would not be appropriately processed
to finally judge them realistically as non-threatening, which could further enhance the
hyper-alert state.
Overstimulation of the anterior insula can contribute to pain as a hypersensitivity
phenomenon by enhancing the subjective intensity and affective perception of incoming
afferent algesic signals [102]. We assume that pain in ME/CFS arises from an interac-
tion between central pain processing and peripheral algesic factors. The latter could
include injury to skeletal muscles, muscle tension and cramps, energetic disturbances
in skeletal muscle potentially leading to the compensatory release of vasoactive media-
tors with algesic and hyperalgesic properties, small fiber neuropathy, gastrointestinal and
pelvic disturbances, and connective tissue disorders—laxity of ligaments and joints and
craniocervical instability [103–106].
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
11 of 17
Elevated neuronal activity, driven by a predominance of excitatory over inhibitory
neurotransmission within the CNS, increases energy demand; however, cerebral energy
supply is compromised by both reduced large-artery blood flow and impaired neurovascu-
lar coupling. [35–38]. Broad brain overactivation also diminishes the ability to concentrate
and focus on a single demanding cognitive task. Combined with reduced cerebral per-
fusion and severely disturbed sleep, these disturbances could account for the cognitive
impairments commonly observed in patients as explained previously [107]. Reduced ATP-
to-phosphocreatine (PCr) ratio in a neuropsychiatric post-COVID patient was observed
via 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy in the cingulate cortex, indicating impaired brain
energy metabolism, and lower ATP/PCr ratios specifically correlated with poorer cogni-
tive performance [108]. Additional factors could worsen these disturbances: blood–brain
barrier permeability appears to be increased, and intracranial pressure may be slightly
elevated [104,109]. An energy deficit, chronic brain overstimulation without sufficient re-
covery, and insomnia together offer a plausible explanation for mental fatigue in ME/CFS.
3.2. Skeletal Muscle Pathophysiology
Enhanced noradrenergic and particularly glutamatergic activity, combined with re-
duced GABAergic signaling, increases skeletal muscle tone [110]. As we have described
in a recent publication, skeletal muscle membrane—particularly in severely affected
patients—appears to be in a state of depolarization, likely reflecting disturbed electro-
physiology due to insufficient activity of the Na+/K+-ATPase required to maintain the
negative resting membrane potential [72]. As the resting membrane potential then gets
closer to the activation threshold causing hyperexcitability, increased central muscle tone
due to a predominance of excitatory over inhibitory neurotransmitters involved in skeletal
muscle tone regulation could therefore easily trigger abnormal excitations. These inap-
propriate excitations may manifest clinically as fasciculations and cramps and lead to
sodium influx and potassium efflux, thereby further increasing the workload of the al-
ready impaired Na+/K+-ATPase. As a result, Na+/K+-ATPase can no longer restore the
physiological membrane potential; depolarization worsens, calcium overload ensues, and
mitochondria can be damaged. Mechanistically this involves reversal of the Na+/Ca2+
exchanger (NCX), which begins importing calcium instead of exporting it in the setting
of elevated intracellular sodium and a more positive membrane potential. High stress
levels, finally mediated by the excitatory neurotransmitters, additionally promote vasocon-
striction and desensitize β2-adrenergic receptors. These receptors, together with CGRP
during exercise, are the only hormonal activators of the Na+/K+-ATPase. Its insufficient
stimulation contributes to intracellular sodium accumulation and calcium overload and
subsequent mitochondrial and myocyte injury. Mitochondrial dysfunction, together with
disturbances of perfusion and diffusion, impairs skeletal muscle energetics and can explain
physical fatigue [111].
4. Why Current Treatments Targeting Neurotransmitter Imbalance Show
Limited Efficacy in ME/CFS
At present, no treatment for ME/CFS provides satisfactory improvement, let alone
disease remission. Several factors may explain the limited efficacy of currently available
therapeutic approaches. Once ME/CFS is established, the dominant pathophysiological
mechanisms appear to shift from early neurotransmitter imbalances toward self-sustaining
pathomechanisms, including mitochondrial dysfunction, persistent skeletal muscle de-
polarization, oxidative stress, and impaired tissue perfusion. These processes mutually
reinforce one another through complex feedback loops involving sympathetic overactivity,
hypovolemia, inflammation, and chronic stress responses. As a result, cardinal clinical
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
12 of 17
symptoms such as exercise intolerance and PEM become largely independent of the original
disease trigger.
The effectiveness of pharmacological interventions targeting neurotransmitter systems
is further constrained by substantial interindividual variability in the specific neurotrans-
mitters affected, as well as by the fact that multiple physiological systems can be disturbed
simultaneously. This limitation is particularly evident in patients with clear autoimmune
signatures, with autoantibodies directed against multiple targets and receptors, often ex-
tending beyond classical neurotransmitter-related structures to include peripheral and
non-neuronal structures. In such cases, interventions aimed at only one or two neuro-
transmitter systems may be insufficient or poorly aligned with the patient’s dominant
pathomechanisms. For these patients, therapeutic strategies targeting autoimmune mecha-
nisms may hold greater promise.
More effective rebalancing approaches may require carefully titrated combinations
of drugs that address multiple neurotransmitter systems as well as central regulation
of muscle tone, potentially including antihistamines. However, poor drug tolerability
and marked interindividual variability pose major challenges to combination therapies.
These factors necessitate very low starting doses, slow and cautious titration, and a high
degree of clinical patience. Additionally, many patients appear to rely on elevated sym-
pathetic activation as a compensatory mechanism to counteract metabolic fatigue and
orthostatic dysfunction. While this persistent sympathetic overactivation may offer short-
term functional compensation, it likely contributes to disease perpetuation and worsening
over time. Consequently, in some patients, reducing sympathetic overshoot with sym-
patholytic agents may be beneficial, whereas in others it may aggravate symptoms and
functional impairment.
5. Conclusions
Growing evidence indicates that, in addition to the noradrenergic system, several
other neurotransmitter systems—particularly glutamate, serotonin and GABA—are dys-
regulated in ME/CFS. This imbalance, characterized by excessive excitatory relative to
inhibitory signaling, may drive neural overactivation and autonomic dysfunction. These
disturbances may cause key neurological symptoms and contribute to skeletal-muscle dys-
function that manifests as exercise intolerance, PEM, fasciculations, and cramps. The aim of
future research should be to systematically investigate which neurotransmitter systems are
affected across the ME/CFS patient population and to determine whether interindividual
differences exist. Assuming substantial heterogeneity exists, a long-term objective should
be to identify each patient’s specific neurotransmitter abnormalities to enable optimally
individualized, targeted rebalancing therapies.
Author Contributions:
K.J.W.:
Writing—original draft, writing—review and editing.
C.S.:
Writing—original draft, writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.
Conflicts of Interest: K.J.W. is co-founder and managing director of Mitodicure GmbH. The remaining
author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
13 of 17
References
1.
Carruthers, B.M.; van de Sande, M.I.; De Meirleir, K.L.; Klimas, N.G.; Broderick, G.; Mitchell, T.; Staines, D.; Powles, A.C.;
Speight, N.; Vallings, R.; et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis: International Consensus Criteria. J. Intern. Med. 2011, 270, 327–338.
Corrigendum in J. Intern. Med. 2017, 282, 353. [CrossRef]
2.
Kedor, C.; Freitag, H.; Meyer-Arndt, L.; Wittke, K.; Hanitsch, L.G.; Zoller, T.; Steinbeis, F.; Haffke, M.; Rudolf, G.; Heidecker,
B.; et al. A prospective observational study of post-COVID-19 chronic fatigue syndrome following the first pandemic wave in
Germany and biomarkers associated with symptom severity. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 5104. Correction in Nat. Commun. 2022,
13, 6009. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Wyller, V.B.; Saul, J.; Amlie, J.P.; Thaulow, E. Sympathetic predominance of cardiovascular regulation during mild orthostatic
stress in adolescents with chronic fatigue. Clin. Physiol. Funct. Imaging 2007, 27, 231–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Freeman, R.; Komaroff, A.L. Does the chronic fatigue syndrome involve the autonomic nervous system? Am. J. Med. 1997,
102, 357–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Stewart, J.M. Autonomic Nervous System Dysfunction in Adolescents with Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome and
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Is Characterized by Attenuated Vagal Baroreflex and Potentiated Sympathetic Vasomotion. Pediatr.
Res. 2000, 48, 218–226. [CrossRef]
6.
Van Cauwenbergh, D.; Nijs, J.; Kos, D.; Van Weijnen, L.; Struyf, F.; Meeus, M. Malfunctioning of the autonomic nervous system in
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: A systematic literature review. Eur. J. Clin. Investig. 2014, 44, 516–526. [CrossRef]
7.
Nelson, M.J.; Bahl, J.S.; Buckley, J.D.; Thomson, R.L.; Davison, K. Evidence of altered cardiac autonomic regulation in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine 2019, 98, e17600. [CrossRef]
8.
Sisto, S.A.; Tapp, W.; Drastal, S.; Bergen, M.; DeMasi, I.; Cordero, D.; Natelson, B. Vagal tone is reduced during paced breathing in
patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin. Auton. Res. 1995, 5, 139–143. [CrossRef]
9.
Beaumont, A.; Burton, A.R.; Lemon, J.; Bennett, B.K.; Lloyd, A.; Vollmer-Conna, U. Reduced cardiac vagal modulation impacts on
cognitive performance in chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e49518. [CrossRef]
10.
Yamamoto, Y.; LaManca, J.J.; Natelson, B.H. A measure of heart rate variability is sensitive to orthostatic challenge in women
with chronic fatigue syndrome. Exp. Biol. Med. 2003, 228, 167–174. [CrossRef]
11.
Boneva, R.S.; Decker, M.J.; Maloney, E.M.; Lin, J.-M.; Jones, J.F.; Helgason, H.G.; Heim, C.M.; Rye, D.B.; Reeves, W.C. Higher
heart rate and reduced heart rate variability persist during sleep in chronic fatigue syndrome: A population-based study. Auton.
Neurosci. 2007, 137, 94–101. [CrossRef]
12.
Van Oosterwijck, J.; Marusic, U.; De Wandele, I.; Meeus, M.; Paul, L.; Lambrecht, L.; Moorkens, G.; Danneels, L.; Nijs, J. Reduced
parasympathetic reactivation during recovery from exercise in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Clin. Med.
2021, 10, 4527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Słomko, J.; Estévez-López, F.; Kujawski, S.; Zawadka-Kunikowska, M.; Tafil-Klawe, M.; Klawe, J.J.; Morten, K.J.; Szrajda, J.;
Murovska, M.; Newton, J.L.; et al. Autonomic phenotypes in chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) are associated with illness severity:
A cluster analysis. J. Clin. Med. 2020, 9, 2531. [CrossRef]
14.
Hendrix, J.; Fanning, L.; Wyns, A.; Ahmed, I.; Patil, M.S.; Richter, E.; Van Campenhout, J.; Ickmans, K.; Mertens, R.; Nijs, J.; et al.
Adrenergic dysfunction in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur. J. Clin. Investig. 2025, 55, e14318. [CrossRef]
15.
Nakano, Y.; Wiechert, S.; Bánfi, B. Overlapping activities of two neuronal splicing factors switch the GABA effect from excitatory
to inhibitory by regulating REST. Cell Rep. 2019, 27, 860–871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Hoheisel, F.; Fleischer, K.M.; Rubarth, K.; Sepúlveda, N.; Bauer, S.M.; Konietschke, F.; Peters, C.K.; Stein, A.E.; Wittke, K.; Seifert,
M.; et al. Exploratory Study on Autoantibodies to Arginine-rich Human Peptides Mimicking Epstein-Barr Virus in Women with
Post-COVID and Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Front. Immunol. 2025, 16, 1650948. [CrossRef]
17.
Schlauch, K.A.; Khaiboullina, S.F.; De Meirleir, K.L.; Rawat, S.; Petereit, J.; Rizvanov, A.A.; Blatt, N.; Mijatovic, T.; Kulick, D.;
Palotás, A.; et al. Genome-wide association analysis identifies genetic variations in subjects with myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Transl. Psychiatry 2016, 6, e730. [CrossRef]
18.
Thapaliya, K.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S.; Eaton-Fitch, N.; Eftekhari, Z.; Inderyas, M.; Barnden, L. Imbalanced brain neurochemicals
in long COVID and ME/CFS: A preliminary study using MRI. Am. J. Med. 2025, 138, 567–574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Sotzny, F.; Filgueiras, I.S.; Kedor, C.; Freitag, H.; Wittke, K.; Bauer, S.; Sepúlveda, N.; da Fonseca, D.L.M.; Baiocchi, G.C.; Marques,
A.H.C.; et al. Dysregulated autoantibodies targeting vaso- and immunoregulatory receptors in Post COVID Syndrome correlate
with symptom severity. Front. Immunol. 2022, 13, 981532. [CrossRef]
20.
Kimura, Y.; Sato, W.; Maikusa, N.; Ota, M.; Shigemoto, Y.; Chiba, E.; Arizono, E.; Maki, H.; Shin, I.; Amano, K.; et al. Free-
water-corrected diffusion and adrenergic/muscarinic antibodies in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J.
Neuroimaging 2023, 33, 845–851. [CrossRef]
21.
Gyires, K.; Zádori, Z.S.; Török, T.; Mátyus, P. α2-Adrenoceptor subtypes-mediated physiological, pharmacological actions.
Neurochem. Int. 2009, 55, 447–453. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
14 of 17
22.
Freitag, H.; Szklarski, M.; Lorenz, S.; Sotzny, F.; Bauer, S.; Philippe, A.; Arizono, E.; Maki, H.; Shin, I.; Amano, K.; et al.
Autoantibodies to Vasoregulative G-Protein-Coupled Receptors Correlate with Symptom Severity, Autonomic Dysfunction and
Disability in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. J. Clin. Med. 2021, 10, 3675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Schmitz, B.; Garbsch, R.; Schäfer, H.; Bär, C.; Chatterjee, S.; Riemekasten, G.; Schulze-Forster, K.; Heidecke, H.; Schultheiß, C.;
Binder, M.; et al. Autonomic dysfunction and vasoregulation in long COVID-19 are linked to anti-GPCR autoantibodies. J. Allergy
Clin. Immunol. 2025, 157, 722–738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Sommerfeldt, L.; Portilla, H.; Jacobsen, L.; Gjerstad, J.; Wyller, V.B. Polymorphisms of adrenergic cardiovascular control genes are
associated with adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. Acta Paediatr. 2011, 100, 293–298. [CrossRef]
25.
Hall, K.T.; Kossowsky, J.; Oberlander, T.F.; Kaptchuk, T.J.; Saul, J.P.; Wyller, V.B.; Fagermoen, E.; Sulheim, D.; Gjerstad, J.; Winger,
A.; et al. Genetic variation in catechol-O-methyltransferase modifies effects of clonidine treatment in chronic fatigue syndrome.
Pharmacogenomics J. 2016, 16, 454–460. [CrossRef]
26.
Polli, A.; Hendrix, J.; Ickmans, K.; Bakusic, J.; Ghosh, M.; Monteyne, D.; Velkeniers, B.; Bekaert, B.; Nijs, J.; Godderis, L. Genetic and
epigenetic regulation of Catechol-O-methyltransferase in relation to inflammation in chronic fatigue syndrome and Fibromyalgia.
J. Transl. Med. 2022, 20, 487. [CrossRef]
27.
Löbel, M.; Mooslechner, A.A.; Bauer, S.; Günther, S.; Letsch, A.; Hanitsch, L.G.; Grabowski, P.; Meisel, C.; Volk, H.-D.; Scheibenbo-
gen, C. Polymorphism in COMT is associated with IgG3 subclass level and susceptibility to infection in patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome. J. Transl. Med. 2015, 13, 264. [CrossRef]
28.
van Campen, C.L.; Rowe, P.C.; Visser, F.C. Deconditioning does not explain orthostatic intolerance in ME/CFS (myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome). J. Transl. Med. 2021, 19, 193. [CrossRef]
29.
van Campen, C.M.; Cvan Rowe, P.C.; Visser, F.C. Orthostatic symptoms and reductions in cerebral blood flow in Long-Haul
COVID-19 patients: Similarities with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Medicina 2021, 58, 28. [CrossRef]
30.
van Campen, C.; Visser, F.C. Long-Haul COVID patients: Prevalence of POTS are reduced but cerebral blood flow abnormalities
remain abnormal with longer disease duration. Healthcare 2022, 10, 2105. [CrossRef]
31.
Adodo, R.; Da Nobrega, A.S.; Villar, R.; Webber, S.C.; Sanchez-Ramirez, D.C. Associations between heart rate and physical activity
in people with post-COVID-19 condition accounting for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome symptoms. J.
Rehabil. Med. 2026, 58, jrm43340. [CrossRef]
32.
Walitt, B.; Singh, K.; LaMunion, S.R.; Hallett, M.; Jacobson, S.; Chen, K.; Enose-Akahata, Y.; Apps, R.; Barb, J.J.; Bedard, P.;
et al. Deep phenotyping of post-infectious myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 907.
[CrossRef]
33.
Shore, P.A.; Giachetti, A. Reserpine: Basic and clinical pharmacology. In Handbook of Psychopharmacology: Volume 10, Neuroleptics
and Schizophrenia; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1978; pp. 197–219.
34.
Weerink, M.A.; Struys, M.M.; Hannivoort, L.N.; Barends, C.R.; Absalom, A.R.; Colin, P. Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of dexmedetomidine. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 2017, 56, 893–913. [CrossRef]
35.
van Campen, C.; Rowe, P.C.; Visser, F.C. Cerebral Blood Flow Is Reduced in Severe Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome Patients During Mild Orthostatic Stress Testing: An Exploratory Study at 20 Degrees of Head-Up Tilt Testing. Healthcare
2020, 8, 169. [CrossRef]
36.
Shan, Z.Y.; Finegan, K.; Bhuta, S.; Ireland, T.; Staines, D.R.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S.M.; Barnden, L.R. Brain function characteristics
of chronic fatigue syndrome: A task fMRI study. NeuroImage Clin. 2018, 19, 279–286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
Shan, Z.Y.; Barnden, L.R.; Kwiatek, R.A.; Bhuta, S.; Hermens, D.F.; Lagopoulos, J. Neuroimaging characteristics of myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): A systematic review. J. Transl. Med. 2020, 18, 335. [CrossRef]
38.
Tanaka, M.; Sadato, N.; Okada, T.; Mizuno, K.; Sasabe, T.; Tanabe, H.C.; Saito, D.N.; Onoe, H.; Kuratsune, H.; Watanabe, Y.
Reduced responsiveness is an essential feature of chronic fatigue syndrome: A fMRI study. BMC Neurol. 2006, 6, 9. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
39.
Jothi, S.; Insel, M.; Claessen, G.; Kubba, S.; Howden, E.J.; Ruiz-Carmona, S.; Levine, T.; Rischard, F.P. Long COVID and chronic
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalitis share similar pathophysiologic mechanisms of exercise limitation. Physiol. Rep. 2025,
13, e70535. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Lohse, M.J.; Engelhardt, S.; Eschenhagen, T. What is the role of β-adrenergic signaling in heart failure? Circ. Res. 2003, 93, 896–906.
[CrossRef]
41.
Cotecchia, S.; Stanasila, L.; Diviani, D. Protein-protein interactions at the adrenergic receptors. Curr. Drug Targets 2012, 13, 15–27.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Pirkmajer, S.; Chibalin, A.V. Na,K-ATPase regulation in skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2016, 311, E1–E31.
[CrossRef]
43.
Fredsted, A.; Gissel, H.; Ørtenblad, N.; Clausen, T. Effects of β2-agonists on force during and following anoxia in rat extensor
digitorum longus muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 2012, 112, 2057–2067. [CrossRef]
44.
Clausen, T. Na+-K+ Pump Regulation and Skeletal Muscle Contractility. Physiol. Rev. 2003, 83, 1269–1324. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
15 of 17
45.
Davenport, T.E.; Lehnen, M.; Stevens, S.R.; VanNess, J.M.; Stevens, J.; Snell, C.R. Chronotropic Intolerance: An Overlooked
Determinant of Symptoms and Activity Limitation in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome? Front. Pediatr.
2019, 7, 82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Naschitz, J.E.; Slobodin, G.; Sharif, D.; Fields, M.; Isseroff, H.; Sabo, E.; Rosner, I. Electrocardiographic QT interval and
cardiovascular reactivity in fibromyalgia differ from chronic fatigue syndrome. Eur. J. Intern. Med. 2008, 19, 187–191. [CrossRef]
47.
Wang, H.; Chen, Y.; Zhu, H.; Wang, S.; Zhang, X.; Xu, D.; Cao, K.; Zou, J. Increased response to β2-adrenoreceptor stimulation
augments inhibition of IKr in heart failure ventricular myocytes. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e46186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Novodvorsky, P.; Bernjak, A.; Robinson, E.J.; Iqbal, A.; Macdonald, I.A.; Jacques, R.M.; Marques, J.L.B.; Sheridan, P.J.;
Heller, S.R. Salbutamol-induced electrophysiological changes show no correlation with electrophysiological changes during
hyperinsulinaemic–hypoglycaemic clamp in young people with Type 1 diabetes. Diabet. Med. 2018, 35, 1264–1272. [CrossRef]
49.
Joseph, P.; Pari, R.; Miller, S.; Warren, A.; Stovall, M.C.; Squires, J.; Chang, C.-J.; Xiao, W.; Waxman, A.B.; Systrom, D.M.
Neurovascular Dysregulation and Acute Exercise Intolerance in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Pyridostigmine. Chest 2022, 162, 1116–1126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Schlömer, E.; Stein, E.; Kedor, C.; Rust, R.; Brock, A.; Wittke, K.; Scheibenbogen, C.; Kim, L. Pyridostigmine improves hand grip
strength in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Front. Neurosci. 2025, 19, 1637838. [CrossRef]
51.
Wang, Y.; Pereira, E.; Maus, A.; Ostlie, N.; Navaneetham, D.; Lei, S.; Albuquerque, E.X.; Conti-Fine, B.M. Human bronchial
epithelial and endothelial cells express α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Mol. Pharmacol. 2001, 60, 1201–1209. Correction in
Mol. Pharmacol. 2002, 62, 192. [CrossRef]
52.
Iqbal, N.T.; Khan, H.; Khalid, A.; Mahmood, S.F.; Nasir, N.; Khanum, I.; de Siqueira, I.; Van Voorhis, W. Chronic inflammation in
post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 modulates gut microbiome: A review of literature on COVID-19 sequelae and gut dysbiosis.
Mol. Med. 2025, 31, 22. [CrossRef]
53.
Simadibrata, D.M.; Lesmana, E.; Gunawan, J.; Quigley, E.M.; Simadibrata, M. A systematic review of gut microbiota profile in
COVID-19 patients and among those who have recovered from COVID-19. J. Dig. Dis. 2023, 24, 244–261. [CrossRef]
54.
Zhang, D.; Zhou, Y.; Ma, Y.; Chen, P.; Tang, J.; Yang, B.; Li, H.; Liang, M.; Xue, Y.; Liu, Y.; et al. Gut microbiota dysbiosis correlates
with long COVID-19 at one-year after discharge. J. Korean Med. Sci. 2023, 38, e120. [CrossRef]
55.
Oh, S.; An, S.; Park, K.; Lee, S.; Han, Y.M.; Koh, S.-J.; Lee, J.; Gim, H.; Kim, D.; Seo, H. Gut Microbial Signatures in Long COVID:
Potential Biomarkers and Therapeutic Targets. Infect. Dis. Ther. 2025, 14, 1461–1475. [CrossRef]
56.
Barton, J.R.; Londregan, A.K.; Alexander, T.D.; Entezari, A.A.; Covarrubias, M.; Waldman, S.A. Enteroendocrine cell regulation of
the gut-brain axis. Front. Neurosci. 2023, 17, 1272955. [CrossRef]
57.
Kaelberer, M.M.; Buchanan, K.L.; Klein, M.E.; Barth, B.B.; Montoya, M.M.; Shen, X.; Bohórquez, D.V. A gut-brain neural circuit for
nutrient sensory transduction. Science 2018, 361, eaat5236. [CrossRef]
58.
Guo, L.; Appelman, B.; Mooij-Kalverda, K.; Houtkooper, R.H.; van Weeghel, M.; Vaz, F.M.; Dijkhuis, A.; Dekker, T.; Smids, B.S.;
Duitman, J.W.; et al. Prolonged indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase-2 activity and associated cellular stress in post-acute sequelae of
SARS-CoV-2 infection. EBioMedicine 2023, 94, 104729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Rus, C.P. Disruptions in serotonin-and kynurenine pathway metabolism in post-COVID: Biomarkers and treatment. Front. Neurol.
2025, 16, 1532383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Cysique, L.A.; Jakabek, D.; Bracken, S.G.; Allen-Davidian, Y.; Heng, B.; Chow, S.; Dehhaghi, M.; Pires, A.S.; Darley, D.R.; Byrne,
A.; et al. Post-acute COVID-19 cognitive impairment and decline uniquely associate with kynurenine pathway activation: A
longitudinal observational study. Medrxiv, 2022. preprint.
61.
Cron, R.Q. Immunologic prediction of long COVID. Nat. Immunol. 2023, 24, 207–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Chilosi, M.; Doglioni, C.; Ravaglia, C.; Martignoni, G.; Salvagno, G.L.; Pizzolo, G.; Bronte, V.; Poletti, V. Unbalanced IDO1/IDO2
endothelial expression and skewed keynurenine pathway in the pathogenesis of COVID-19 and post-COVID-19 pneumonia.
Biomedicines 2022, 10, 1332. [CrossRef]
63.
Wong, A.C.; Devason, A.S.; Umana, I.C.; Cox, T.O.; Dohnalová, L.; Litichevskiy, L.; Perla, J.; Lundgren, P.; Etwebi, Z.; Izzo, L.T.;
et al. Serotonin reduction in post-acute sequelae of viral infection. Cell 2023, 186, 4851–4867. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Raij, T.; Raij, K. Association between fatigue, peripheral serotonin, and L-carnitine in hypothyroidism and in chronic fatigue
syndrome. Front. Endocrinol. 2024, 15, 1358404. [CrossRef]
65.
Nagy-Szakal, D.; Barupal, D.K.; Lee, B.; Che, X.; Williams, B.L.; Kahn, E.J.R.; Ukaigwe, J.E.; Bateman, L.; Klimas, N.G.; Ko-maroff,
A.L.; et al. Insights into myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome phenotypes through comprehensive metabolomics.
Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 10056. [CrossRef]
66.
Mathé, P.; Götz, V.; Stete, K.; Walzer, D.; Hilger, H.; Pfau, S.; Hofmann, M.; Rieg, S.; Kern, W.V. No reduced serum serotonin levels
in patients with post-acute sequelae of COVID-19. Infection 2025, 53, 463–466. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Abujrais, S.; Vallianatou, T.; Bergquist, J. Untargeted Metabolomics and Quantitative Analysis of Tryptophan Metabolites in
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis Patients and Healthy Volunteers: A Comparative Study Using High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry.
ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2024, 15, 3525–3534. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
16 of 17
68.
Rus, C.P.; de Vries, B.E.; de Vries, I.E.; Nutma, I.; Kooij, J.S. Treatment of 95 post-Covid patients with SSRIs. Sci. Rep. 2023,
13, 18599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Giorgi, A.; Heckman, C.; Perreault, M.-C. Spinally Projecting Serotonergic Neurons in Motor Network Modulation. J. Neurophysiol.
2025, 134, 1619–1628. [CrossRef]
70.
Ghosh, M.; Pearse, D.D. The role of the serotonergic system in locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury. Front. Neural Circuits
2015, 8, 151. [CrossRef]
71.
Goodlich, B.I.; Del Vecchio, A.; Horan, S.A.; Kavanagh, J.J. Blockade of 5-HT2 receptors suppresses motor unit firing and estimates
of persistent inward currents during voluntary muscle contraction in humans. J. Physiol. 2023, 601, 1121–1138. [CrossRef]
72.
Wirth, K.; Steinacker, J.M. The Potential Causes Of Myasthenia And Fasciculations In The Severely Ill Me/Cfs-Patient: Role Of
Disturbed Electrophysiology. Front. Physiol. 2025, 16, 1693589. [CrossRef]
73.
Taenzer, M.; Löffler-Ragg, J.; Schroll, A.; Monfort-Lanzas, P.; Engl, S.; Weiss, G.; Brigo, N.; Kurz, K. Urine Metabolite analysis to
identify Pathomechanisms of long COVID: A pilot study. Int. J. Tryptophan Res. 2023, 16, 11786469231220781. [CrossRef]
74.
Cabanas, H.; Muraki, K.; Balinas, C.; Eaton-Fitch, N.; Staines, D.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. Validation of impaired Transient Receptor
Potential Melastatin 3 ion channel activity in natural killer cells from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis
patients. Mol. Med. 2019, 25, 14. [CrossRef]
75.
Cabanas, H.; Muraki, K.; Eaton, N.; Balinas, C.; Staines, D.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. Loss of Transient Receptor Potential Melastatin
3 ion channel function in natural killer cells from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis patients. Mol. Med.
2018, 24, 44. [CrossRef]
76.
Eaton-Fitch, N.; Du Preez, S.; Cabanas, H.; Muraki, K.; Staines, D.; Marshall-Gradisnik, S. Impaired TRPM3-dependent calcium
influx and restoration using Naltrexone in natural killer cells of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients. J.
Transl. Med. 2022, 20, 94. [CrossRef]
77.
Seljeset, S.; Liebowitz, S.; Bright, D.P.; Smart, T.G. Pre- and postsynaptic modulation of hippocampal inhibitory synaptic
transmission by pregnenolone sulphate. Neuropharmacology 2023, 233, 109530. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Löhn, M.; Wirth, K.J. Potential pathophysiological role of the ion channel TRPM3 in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome (ME/CFS) and the therapeutic effect of low-dose naltrexone. J. Transl. Med. 2024, 22, 630. [CrossRef]
79.
Delgado-Ramírez, X.; Alvarado-Cervantes, N.S.; Jiménez-Barrios, N.; Raya-Tafolla, G.; Felix, R.; Martínez-Rojas, V.A.; Delgado-
Lezama, R. GABAB Receptors Tonically Inhibit Motoneurons and Neurotransmitter Release from Descending and Primary
Afferent Fibers. Life 2023, 13, 1776. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Thorstensen, J.R.; Henderson, T.T.; Kavanagh, J.J. Serotonergic and noradrenergic contributions to motor cortical and spinal
motoneuronal excitability in humans. Neuropharmacology 2024, 242, 109761. [CrossRef]
81.
Fujimoto, Y.; Abe, H.; Eiro, T.; Tsugawa, S.; Tanaka, M.; Hatano, M.; Nakajima, W.; Ichijo, S.; Arisawa, T.; Takada, Y.; et al. Systemic
increase of AMPA receptors associated with cognitive impairment of long COVID. Brain Commun. 2025, 7, fcaf337. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
82.
VanElzakker, M.B.; Brumfield, S.A.; Lara Mejia, P.S. Neuroinflammation and Cytokines in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): A Critical Review of Research Methods. Front. Neurol. 2018, 9, 1033. Corrigendum in Front. Neurol.
2019, 10, 316. Corrigendum in Front. Neurol. 2020, 11, 863. [CrossRef]
83.
Tate, W.; Walker, M.; Sweetman, E.; Helliwell, A.; Peppercorn, K.; Edgar, C.; Blair, A.; Chatterjee, A. Molecular mechanisms
of neuroinflammation in ME/CFS and long COVID to sustain disease and promote relapses. Front. Neurol. 2022, 13, 877772.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Glassford, J.A. The neuroinflammatory etiopathology of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Front.
Physiol. 2017, 8, 88. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Lee, J.-S.; Sato, W.; Son, C.-G. Brain-regional characteristics and neuroinflammation in ME/CFS patients from neuroimaging: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Autoimmun. Rev. 2024, 23, 103484. [CrossRef]
86.
Yu, Q.; Kothe, K.; Kwiatek, R.A.; Del Fante, P.; Bonner, A.; Calhoun, V.D.; Shan, Z.Y. Evidence of White Matter Neuroinflammation
in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A Diffusion-Based Neuroinflammation Imaging Study. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 2026, 47, e70505. [CrossRef]
87.
Bastos, V.C.; Greene, K.A.; Tabachnikova, A.; Bhattacharjee, B.; Sjögren, P.; Bertilson, B.; Reifert, J.; Zhang, M.; Kamath, K.; Shon, J.;
et al. Cerebrospinal fluid immune phenotyping reveals distinct immunotypes of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome. J. Immunol. 2025, 214, vkaf087. [CrossRef]
88.
Garaschuk, O.; Verkhratsky, A. GABAergic astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease. Aging 2019, 11, 1602. [CrossRef]
89.
Hu, S.; Sheng, W.S.; Ehrlich, L.C.; Peterson, P.K.; Chao, C.C. Cytokine effects on glutamate uptake by human astrocytes.
Neuroimmunomodulation 2000, 7, 153–159. [CrossRef]
90.
Plioplys, A.V.; Plioplys, S. Amantadine and L-carnitine treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome. Neuropsychobiology 1997, 35, 16–23.
[CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2026, 27, 4041
17 of 17
91.
Harandi, A.A.; Pakdaman, H.; Medghalchi, A.; Kimia, N.; Kazemian, A.; Siavoshi, F.; Barough, S.S.; Esfandani, A.; Hosseini, M.H.;
Sobhanian, S.A. A randomized open-label clinical trial on the effect of Amantadine on post COVID-19 fatigue. Sci. Rep. 2024,
14, 1343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Shank, R.; Aprison, M.; Baxter, C. Precursors of glycine in the nervous system: Comparison of specific activities in glycine and
other amino acids after administration of [U-14C] glucose, [3, 4-14C] glucose, [1-14C] glucose, [U-14C] serine or [1, 5-14C] citrate
to the rat. Brain Res. 1973, 52, 301–308. [CrossRef]
93.
Baraniuk, J.N. Exertional Exhaustion (Post-Exertional Malaise, PEM) Evaluated by the Effects of Exercise on Cerebrospinal Fluid
Metabolomics–Lipidomics and Serine Pathway in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2025,
26, 1282. [CrossRef]
94.
Crosby, L.; Kalanidhi, S.; Bonilla, A.; Subramanian, A.; Ballon, J.; Bonilla, H. Off label use of Aripiprazole shows promise as a
treatment for Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): A retrospective study of 101 patients treated
with a low dose of Aripiprazole. J. Transl. Med. 2021, 19, 50. Correction in J. Transl. Med. 2021, 19, 217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Wirth, K.J.; Löhn, M. Orthostatic Intolerance after COVID-19 Infection: Is Disturbed Microcirculation of the Vasa Vasorum of
Capacitance Vessels the Primary Defect? Medicina 2022, 58, 1807. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Blandina, P.; Munari, L.; Provensi, G.; Passani, M.B. Histamine neurons in the tuberomamillary nucleus: A whole center or
distinct subpopulations? Front. Syst. Neurosci. 2012, 6, 33. [CrossRef]
97.
Bested, A.; Saunders, P.; Logan, A. Chronic fatigue syndrome: Neurological findings may be related to blood–brain barrier
permeability. Med. Hypotheses 2001, 57, 231–237. [CrossRef]
98.
Sandoval, A.E.; Li, M.; Jason, L.A. Two Neurocognitive Domains Identified for Patients with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome and Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19. Front. Neurol. 2025, 16, 1612548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Wortinger, L.A.; Endestad, T.; Melinder, A.M.D.; Øie, M.G.; Sevenius, A.; Bruun Wyller, V. Aberrant resting-state functional
connectivity in the salience network of adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0159351. [CrossRef]
100. Schimmelpfennig, J.; Topczewski, J.; Zajkowski, W.; Jankowiak-Siuda, K. The role of the salience network in cognitive and
affective deficits. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2023, 17, 1133367. [CrossRef]
101. Manca, R.; Khan, K.; Mitolo, M.; De Marco, M.; Grieveson, L.; Varley, R.; Wilkinson, I.D.; Venneri, A. Modulatory effects of
cognitive exertion on regional functional connectivity of the salience network in women with ME/CFS: A pilot study. J. Neurol.
Sci. 2021, 422, 117326. [CrossRef]
102. Labrakakis, C. The role of the insular cortex in pain. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24, 5736. [CrossRef]
103. Wirth, K.J.; Scheibenbogen, C. A Unifying Hypothesis of the Pathophysiology of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS): Recognitions from the finding of autoantibodies against ss2-adrenergic receptors. Autoimmun. Rev. 2020,
19, 102527. [CrossRef]
104. Bragée, B.; Michos, A.; Drum, B.; Fahlgren, M.; Szulkin, R.; Bertilson, B.C. Signs of Intracranial Hypertension, Hypermobility, and
Craniocervical Obstructions in Patients With Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Front. Neurol. 2020, 11, 828.
[CrossRef]
105. Appelman, B.; Charlton, B.T.; Goulding, R.P.; Kerkhoff, T.J.; Breedveld, E.A.; Noort, W.; Offringa, C.; Bloemers, F.W.; van Weeghel,
M.; Schomakers, B.V.; et al. Muscle abnormalities worsen after post-exertional malaise in long COVID. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 17.
[CrossRef]
106. Frost, N.; Barclay, S. Neuraxial biomechanics, fluid dynamics, and myodural regulation: Rethinking management of hypermobility
and CNS disorders. Front. Neurol. 2024, 15, 1479545. [CrossRef]
107. Wirth, K.J.; Scheibenbogen, C.; Paul, F. An attempt to explain the neurological symptoms of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome. J. Transl. Med. 2021, 19, 471. Correction in J. Transl. Med. 2022, 20, 25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Weber-Fahr, W.; Dommke, S.; Sack, M.; Alzein, N.; Becker, R.; Demirakca, T.; Ende, G.; Schilling, C. Reduced ATP-to-
phosphocreatine ratios in neuropsychiatric post-COVID condition: Evidence from 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Biol.
Psychiatry 2026. [CrossRef]
109. Hasan-Olive, M.M.; Hansson, H.-A.; Enger, R.; Nagelhus, E.A.; Eide, P.K. Blood-Brain Barrier Dysfunction in Idiopathic
Intracranial Hypertension. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 2019, 78, 808–818. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Burgess, C.; Lai, D.; Siegel, J.; Peever, J. An endogenous glutamatergic drive onto somatic motoneurons contributes to the
stereotypical pattern of muscle tone across the sleep–wake cycle. J. Neurosci. 2008, 28, 4649–4660. [CrossRef]
111. Charlton, B.T.; Goulding, R.P.; Jaspers, R.T.; Appelman, B.; van Vugt, M.; Wüst, R.C. Skeletal muscle adaptations and post-
exertional malaise in long COVID. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2025, 36, 614–622. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms27094041
