Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Autoimmunity Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/autrev
Review
A Unifying Hypothesis of the Pathophysiology of Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS): Recognitions from
the finding of autoantibodies against ß2-adrenergic receptors
Klaus Wirtha, Carmen Scheibenbogenb,⁎
a Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland, R&D, Frankfurt a.M., Germany
b Institute for Medical Immunology, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany
A B S T R A C T
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis or Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS/ME) is a complex and severely disabling disease with a prevalence of 0.3% and no approved treatment
and therefore a very high medical need. Following an infectious onset patients suffer from severe central and muscle fatigue, chronic pain, cognitive impairment, and
immune and autonomic dysfunction. Although the etiology of CFS/ME is not solved yet, there is numerous evidence for an autoantibody mediated dysregulation of
the immune and autonomic nervous system.
We found elevated ß2 adrenergic receptor (ß2AdR) and M3 acetylcholine receptor antibodies in a subset of CFS/ME patients. As both ß2AdR and M3 acetylcholine
receptor are important vasodilators, we would expect their functional disturbance to result in vasoconstriction and hypoxemia. An impaired circulation and oxygen
supply could result in many symptoms of ME/CFS. There are consistent reports of vascular dysfunction in ME/CFS. Muscular and cerebral hypoperfusion has been
shown in ME/CFS in various studies and correlated with fatigue. Metabolic changes in ME/CFS are also in line with a concept of hypoxia and ischemia.
Here we try to develop a unifying working concept for the complex pathomechanism of ME/CFS based on the presence of dysfunctional autoantibodies against
ß2AdR and M3 acetylcholine receptor and extrapolate it to the pathophysiology of ME/CFS without an autoimmune pathogenesis.
1. Introduction
ME/CFS is a common and debilitating disorder with a hitherto un-
known etiology but of suspected multifactorial origin. A rough recent
estimate for the number of patients who may be diagnosed with ME or
ME/CFS in the U.S. is 1.7 million to 3.38 million [1]. After decades of
neglect and misjudgement as mental disease there is now ample evi-
dence for a complex dysregulation of the immune and autonomic ner-
vous system in ME/CFS. Common “triggers” include severe viral in-
fections and emotional stress. The disease is characterized by severe
fatigue and exhaustion, muscular and mental fatigue, exercise intoler-
ance, post-exertional malaise (PEM) and a myriad of symptoms in-
cluding impaired cognitive ability, poor sleep quality, muscle pain,
multi-joint pain without swelling or redness, or headache [2,3]. Many
patients suffer from symptoms of autonomic dysfunction including or-
thostatic intolerance and may complain of dizziness, spatial dis-
orientation, sweating, palpitations or fainting [4]. There is a wide
spectrum of non-specific complaints, which may arise secondary to a
disturbance that primarily affects the skeletal muscles and includes flu-
like symptoms, tender lymph nodes, sore throat, dyspnea and irritable
bowel syndrome. PEM, which is a hallmark of ME/CFS, is seen as an
aggravation of all symptoms of ME/CFS. PEM involves an abnormal
response (e.g., an inappropriate loss of physical and mental stamina,
rapid muscular and cognitive fatigability) following physical, cognitive,
emotional or orthostatic exertion [4–6].
Bioenergetic muscle dysfunction is also evident in ME/CFS [7–10].
Patients with ME/CFS performed worse than controls in a controlled
repeated exercise [11]. A diminished oxygen supply of muscles upon
exercise is shown in several studies in ME/CFS patients [12]. In line
with this, metabolic changes in ME/CFS indicate hypoxia and ischemia
[13]. Skeletal muscle acidosis or dysregulation of protons is found in
ME/CFS patients during or after exercise [14–17]. Cultured human
skeletal muscle cells from patients with ME/CFS show impaired glucose
uptake and ATP levels [18].
1.1. Autoantibodies against ß2-adrenergic receptors and M3 acetylcholine
receptors in ME/CFS and their potential pathophysiological relevance
There is ample evidence of immune dysregulation and auto-
immunity in ME/CFS [19,20]. Recently, a network of natural antibodies
against adrenergic, muscarinergic and other GPCR receptors has been
described which are dysregulated in various autoimmune diseases [21].
ß2 adrenergic (ß2AdR) and M3 acetylcholine receptor autoantibodies
have been found to be elevated in a subset of ME/CFS patients [22].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102527
Received 12 January 2020; Accepted 16 January 2020
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Klaus.Wirth@sanofi.com (K. Wirth), carmen.scheibenbogen@charite.de (C. Scheibenbogen).
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
Available online 01 April 2020
1568-9972/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T

Removal of these autoantibodies by IgG apheresis led to rapid im-
provement in most patients demonstrating a pathophysiological role of
autoantibodies in ME/CFS [23]. In a previous study autoantibodies
against the muscarinic cholinergic receptor M1 were already reported
in ME/CFS patients and were associated with reduced binding of a
muscarinic cholinergic receptor ligand in brain detected by PET
[24,25].
In support of the idea that autoantibodies against ß2AdR could
cause ß2AdR dysfunction and could be involved in the pathophysiology
of ME/CFS is the finding that polymorphisms of ß2AdR genes (Gln27
mutation) have been found associated with (adolescent) chronic fatigue
syndrome [26]. In healthy adults the Gln27 and the Arg16 mutations
were found associated with an unfavorable cardiovascular profile
which could be regarded as a mild and asymptomatic form of the car-
diovascular situation found in ME/CFS (see below) [27–29]. Analysis of
the cardiovascular situation in ME/CFS is the focus of this publication
and will be explained in length below.
Numerous studies in ME/CFS showed a decrease heart rate varia-
bility (HRV) suggesting a (chronically) high sympathetic tone and a low
vagal tone [26,30–43]. It is well known from chronic heart failure that
adrenergic receptors desensitize by a chronically high sympathetic tone
and the ß2AdR is the most sensitive subtype among the different
adrenergic receptors for desensitization [44,45]. Altogether, dysfunc-
tion of the ß2AdR may be caused by autoantibodies, mutations of the
receptor and desensitization. In the presence of a high sympathetic tone
as suggested by the HRV studies the association of a high sympathetic
tone with ß2AdR dysfunction may lead to severe autonomic dysfunc-
tion. The association of both changes cannot be emphasized enough.
Could this association explain the enigmatic CV situation of ME/CFS
and symptoms?
2. Adrenergic regulation of vascular function
2.1. The role of ß2AdR in sympathetic vascular innervation
ß2AdR are involved in sympathetic vascular innervation which is
characterized by a dichotomy: Vasoconstrictor alpha1-adrenergic re-
ceptors are opposed by vasodilator β-adrenergic receptors. Whether
vasoconstriction or vasodilation occurs strongly depends on the role of
vasodilating β-adrenergic receptors versus vasoconstrictor alpha-adre-
nergic receptors (mainly alpha1-adrenergic) in an organ. In the healthy
state sympathetic activation causes vasoconstriction by predominance
of alpha1-adrenergic agonism in all organs except for the heart, brain
and skeletal muscle. Vasodilation occurs at physiological levels of ac-
tivation in these organs while a high level of activation as in hemody-
namic shock also causes vasoconstriction. Cognitive fatigability and
muscular fatigue are hallmarks of ME/CFS. Given the importance of
ß2AdR innervation in these organs for perfusion and the possibility that
they are dysfunctional the question arises whether fatigue – mental or
of skeletal muscles – is causally related to ß2AdR dysfunction causing
an issue with perfusion of both organs.
2.2. Evidence for ß2AdR dysfunction in the cardiovascular system in ME/
CFS
Is there any evidence for a ß2AdR dysfunction in the cardiovascular
system in ME/CFS? Electrophysiological findings in the heart of ME/
CFS patients indeed suggest an impaired activation of cardiac ß2AdR
supporting the idea that the ß2AdR autoantibodies are dysfunctional by
the following findings: Chronotropic incompetence has been reported in
ME/CFS during exercise (sinus node effects): Using maximal cardio-
pulmonary testing (CPET) ME/CFS patients show a blunted rise in heart
rate (for review [46]). β1- as well as β2AdR stimulation exert positive
chronotropic effects. In the absence of a sick sinus node it is reasonable
to assume a dysfunction of ß-adrenergic innervation as ß-adrenergic
stimulation mediates physiological tachycardia. Since ß1- as well as
ß2AdR stimulation exert positive chronotropic effects the question
arises which subtype is dysfunctional. ß1- or ß2AdR or both? A second
electrophysiological finding could give a clear answer: Excessive QTc-
shortening in ME/CFS (shortened ventricular repolarization) was re-
ported for ME/CFS patients in a situation of orthostatic stress [47].
What are the respective roles of both ß-adrenergic subtypes in ven-
tricular repolarization? ß1-adrenergic receptor stimulation shortens the
QT-interval by activating cardiac repolarizing “slowly activating de-
layed rectifier potassium channels” (IKs) This strongly suggests intact
ß1-adrenergic receptor function. ß2AdR stimulation prolongs the QT-
interval by inhibiting the cardiac “rapidly activating delayed rectifier
potassium channels” (IKr) [48]. Therefore, QTc shortening can be ex-
plained only by ß2AdR dysfunction in the presence of intact ß1-adre-
nergic receptors and a high sympathetic tone.
Table 1 shows location and function of ß2AdR. Vasodilator ß2AdR
are found in brain vessels and in the vasculature of skeletal muscles,
probably to oppose or limit alpha-adrenergic vasoconstriction or to
induce net vasodilation [27,49–51]. Since autoantibodies against the
M3-receptor has also been found their location and function should also
be briefly mentioned. This receptors is ubiquitously expressed in vas-
cular endothelium to release nitric oxide (NO) [52]. Cholinergic vaso-
dilation is predominantly mediated by the M3-receptor [53]. Both re-
ceptors, ß2AdR and M3-receptor can be considered as important
vascular vasodilators of the autonomic nervous system with particular
importance for cerebral and muscular blood flow [27,54]. Assuming
that the reported antibodies against important vascular receptors cause
dysfunction of the receptors it is reasonable to consider the possibility
that mental and muscular fatigue could be related to a disturbance of
blood flow. Due to its ubiquitous expression in endothelial cells M3
acetylcholine receptor dysfunction may mainly affect blood flow in the
whole body (endothelial dysfunction). In the organs where the blood
vessels are also endowed with ß2AdR the dysfunction of the M3-re-
ceptor may act highly synergistically with ß2AdR receptor-dysfunction
to impair flow at rest and particularly at activation. Here we focus on
the ß2AdR because the ß2AdR is clearly associated with cerebral and
skeletal muscle perfusion.
3. Functional sympatholysis in skeletal muscle
The term functional sympatholysis in skeletal muscles describes the
mechanisms that prevent that vasoconstrictor alpha1-adrenergic re-
ceptors in skeletal muscle during exercise or mental activity cause va-
soconstriction. It comprises a number of different mechanisms. The
precise mechanisms of functional sympatholysis and exercise-induced
vasodilation and muscular hyperemia have not been fully elucidated
but what seems clear is that vascular ß2AdR contribute to vasodilation
in skeletal muscles in exercise induced hyperemia and functional
sympatholysis as do ß1- and ß3-adrenergic receptors [55–57]. If ß2AdR
were dysfunctional the vasodilator forces would be weakened. The
Table 1
Location and function of ß2AdR.
Cardiovascular
Other tissues
Present in blood vessels
• Heart
• Skeletal muscle
• Brain
Mechanisms of vasodilation
• cAMP
• Akt/eNOS
Heart
• Positive inotropic effect
• Positive chronotropic effect
Bronchi
• Dilatation
Immune system
• Inhibition of cytokine release
• Inhibition of T-cell proliferation
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
2

second most important mechanism of functional sympatholysis is the
metabolic stimulation of the release of endogenous, short-lived vaso-
dilators that are released locally and that are supposed to act only lo-
cally.
These
mediators
comprise
adenosine,
ATP,
prostaglandins
(PGEs), prostacylin (PCI), bradykinin (BK), protons, and others. Algesic
vasodilator substances were also found released in heavily working
muscle with unlimited perfusion (microdialysis) [58]. These mediators
are supposed to be involved in functional hyperemia during exercise
where skeletal muscle blood flow can rise by at least 20-fold. These
mediators are not only released for the purpose of functional hyperemia
they were also found elevated in ischemia in skeletal muscle and in the
heart [59, 60–65]. The mediator with the most dramatic actions re-
leased in ischemia is the nanopeptide bradykinin released by the kal-
likrein-kinin-system (KKS) from blood precursors, the kininogens, by
the action of kallikrein. Bradykinin (and PGE2 and prostacyclin) causes
vasodilation and microvascular leakage. Bradykinin is more potent than
histamine in doing this and it is the most potent opener of the blood-
brain-barrier (BBB) [66,67]. The mediators released by ischemic mus-
cles or in the process of functional sympatholysis as a response to ex-
cessive vasoconstrictor influences are also important pain mediators
and are assumed to cause angina pectoris pain in cardiac ischemia,
particularly bradykinin and prostaglandins [60]. Bradykinin is a most
potent algesic endogenous vasodilator peptide also having hyperalgesic
and spasmogenic effects [68,69]. Bradykinin stimulates the production
of prostaglandins such as PGE2 which are known to cause pain and
hyperalgesia so that even smaller algesic stimuli (other modalities) are
perceived as painful. Activation of cyclooxygenase (COX) by bradykinin
contributes to many but not all of its effects [68,70,71].
3.1. Does spillover of algesic vasodilators released from skeletal muscles into
the systemic circulation occur in ME/CFS?
As autonomic vascular innervation fails in skeletal muscles meta-
bolic regulation could gain importance, which would be strongly fa-
vored by a still enigmatic metabolic disturbance in skeletal muscle.
Table 2 summarizes possible causes for functional sympatholysis in
ME/CFS to oppose (increased) alpha1-adrenergic-induced vasocon-
striction.
Could this lead to excessive compensatory generation of algesic
vasodilators in the large body skeletal mass (e.g. during mental stress)
so that high amounts are released? Could spillover of excessively pro-
duced algesic vasodilators into the systemic circulation – despite short
half-lives - explain the enigmatic CV situation and symptoms of ME/
CFS? A paradigm for such a spillover of inflammatory mediators from
an ischemic muscle is severe dysmenorrhea where prostaglandins
(PGE2) are released from a hypoxic uterus, which is hypercontractile
and develops intramuscular pressures > 120 mmHg to severely reduce
perfusion, into the circulation causing systemic complaints [74]. PGE2
levels are found elevated in blood. Such a spillover into the systemic
circulation is considered responsible for symptoms of fatigue, flu-like
symptoms, fever, pain and sleep disturbances in dysmenorrhea [74].
PGE2 having awakening effects may explain sleep disturbances in dys-
menorrhea [75]. There is a wide overlap of symptoms with ME/CFS.
Since the much larger skeletal muscle mass is affected in ME/CFS
compared with the ischemic uterus even a moderate disturbance of the
bioenergetic muscular situation or of the autonomic vascular regulation
could produce relevant concentrations of those algesic endogenous
vasodilators which we assume cause systemic effects. Probably due to
the similarity of symptoms many women with ME/CFS have a diagnosis
of dysmenorrhea or endometriosis as well [76].
4. The cardiovascular situation in ME/CFS
4.1. The unique cardiovascular situation of ME/CFS with hypovolemia,
preload failure, small hearts, high sympathetic and low vagal tone and an
inhibited RAAS
The cardiovascular situation in ME/CFS patients is unique and not
found in any other condition or disease. Low vascular, atrial and ven-
tricular filling suggesting hypovolemia, and preload failure has been
found in a number of studies leading to a low stroke volume and a lower
than normal cardiac output (CO) at rest while the RAAS activity is low
[77–83]. Therefore, ME/CFS is frequently associated with orthostatic
dysfunction (OD) and the postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS). Small
hearts have been typically reported for ME/CFS. Cardiac hypotrophy
may therefore develop chronically as a consequence of chronic low
ventricular filling and a low RAAS activity. Endothelial dysfunction has
been reported which is expected to increase vasoconstrictor efficiency.
HRV indicated a high sympathetic (vasoconstrictor) tone. What could
be the cause of the low filling state of the vasculature?
4.2. Preload failure in ME/CFS, a consequence of hypovolemia by
microvascular leakage and renal hyperfunction and venous vasodilation/
pooling?
According to the considerations made above endogenous vasodi-
lator substances could be produced in skeletal muscles with a poor
bioenergetic situation or for the purpose of functional sympatholysis.
Bradykinin for instance is not only a painful and vasodilator mediator it
also very potent in increasing endothelial (microvascular) permeability
[84,85]. In the systemic circulation this could cause a fluid shift from
the intravascular space to the interstitial space.
Apart from reducing cardiac output a diminished filling of the
vasculature activates the sympathetic nervous system, reduces vagal
tone and it would be expected to activate the renin-angiotensin-aldos-
terone system (RAAS). Increased (vasoconstrictor) sympathetic tone
and reduced vagal activity have indeed been reported in a number of
heart rate variability studies in ME/CFS as mentioned above and could
be explained by hypovolemia. The real surprise is that the RAAS is not
activated in ME/CFS, but renin production and aldosterone are even
decreased, in a situation of hypovolemia which is the typical physio-
logical stimulus for its activation [86–88]. The inability to activate the
RAAS prevents refilling of the vasculature and leads to a rise in sym-
pathetic tone with its enhanced vasoconstrictor efficiency. Under-
standing these unique and enigmatic cardiovascular findings of ME/CFS
in the myriad of confusing symptoms could be the key to understanding
the pathophysiology of ME/CFS.
Bradykinin generated in the ischemic muscle after reaching the
systemic circulation may contribute to the low vascular filling state in
ME/CFS by different mechanisms to which PGE2 and prostacyclin
having similar renal effects may contribute [89]. Increased micro-
vascular leakage is not the only cause of hypovolemia but renal ex-
cretory effects of bradykinin and inhibition of renin production could
contribute. The potential effects of bradykinin on vascular and renal
function are summarized in Table 3.
These actions of bradykinin are in line with the general view that
the
kallikrein-kinin-system
(KKS),
which
releases
bradykinin,
Table 2
Possible causes for enhanced functional sympatholysis in skeletal muscle in
ME/CFS.
1) Dysfunctional ß2AdR due to autoantibodies, mutants and desensitization.
2) High sympathetic (vasoconstrictor) tone as suggested by HRV-studies [30–44].
Sympathetic tone may be enhanced as a reaction to dysfunctional ß2AdR.
Hypovolemia typically found in ME/CFS enhances sympathetic tone.
3) Endothelial or vascular dysfunction of any cause, which is found in patients
[72,73]. Dysfunctional ß2AdR would also cause vascular dysfunction raising the
vasoconstrictor efficiency of alpha1-adrenergic stimulation.
4) Poor background bioenergetic situation due to an unexplained metabolic
(mitochondrial) disturbance cited above: The signal for this metabolic
stimulation of the release of algesic vasodilators is a short fall of ATP in the
beginning of exercise which is expected to be strongly enhanced in the presence
of a bioenergetic disturbance of the skeletal muscle.
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
3

physiologically opposes the effects of RAAS with regard to its main
function of volume regulation [89,93–95,97]. It remains to be in-
vestigated whether in ME/CFS there is a dysbalance between these two
systems favoring the KKS.
There is potential role of heat shock protein90 (Hsp90) in the ac-
tivation of the KKS: Hsp90 can activate the KKS to release bradykinin
independent of FXII and it is released from endothelial cells stimulated
by estrogen, IL-1 and TNF [98]. This could be related to both the fre-
quent post-infectious appearance (IL-1 and TNF) and the female gender
preference (estrogen). As mentioned earlier different mechanisms are
involved simultaneously in functional sympatholysis or hyperemia in
skeletal muscles. It seems possible that in ME/CFS the qualitative
composition of the vasodilator mechanisms or mediators is switched by
Hsp90 towards the release of algesic and inflammatory mediators like
bradykinin which are typically released in ischemia.
Infusion studies of bradykinin in humans did not only show a de-
crease in peripheral resistance indicative of the dilatation of arterial
resistance vessels but also a reduced venous tone indicating that bra-
dykinin could lower cardiac preload by increasing venous blood
pooling by causing venous dilatation [99]. In the presence of hypovo-
lemia enhanced venous pooling is particularly detrimental.
Spillover of vasodilators released from the muscles into the arterial
system during exercise would also be unfavorable for muscle perfusion
because it could cause uncoordinated vasodilation in the other organs
as explained for the kidney, thereby diverting blood from the muscle
(steal-effect). Vasodilation in the intestine may also lead to intestinal
hypervolemia at the expense of preload. Table 4 gives an overview of
the disturbed hemodynamic situation in ME/CFS.
Apart from causing metabolically induced vasodilation by locally
released vasodilators (mechanisms of functional hyperemia) relative
underperfusion of active skeletal muscles in the early phase of an ex-
ercise causes metabolites to accumulate and stimulate skeletal muscle
afferents, which triggers the so-called muscle metaboreflex activation
(MMA). MMA activation in normal subjects during submaximal dy-
namic exercise increases arterial pressure (to raise the perfusion pres-
sure) primarily via increases in stroke volume and less by an increase in
peripheral vasoconstriction [101]. MMA also mobilizes central blood
volume enabling increases in preload and by that in stroke volume.
Thus, metabolic regulation of blood flow to the working skeletal muscle
has a systemic (MMA) and a local component, the metabolically sti-
mulated release of (algesic) vasodilators. Both should be affected by the
poor bioenergetic situation in skeletal muscle in ME/CFS.
In subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus BP response to the MMA
relies more on an increase in systemic vascular resistance than on
cardiac output increments, presumably as a consequence of endothelial
dysfunction raising vasoconstrictor efficiency [102]. Due to preload
failure in ME/CFS patients it seems impossible that MMA could achieve
an adequate rise in perfusion pressure by an adequate increase in stroke
volume at the onset exercise; the only possibility of raising BP is by
vasoconstriction [83]. Concomitant activation of the baroreflex in the
upright position, which is strongly activated by hypovolemia in ME/
CFS, has the potential to aggravate the situation: in experimental heart
failure it has been shown that concomitant activation of the baroreflex
and the MMA act synergistically to cause vasoconstriction in skeletal
muscles [101]. The situation would be aggravated by a dysfunctional
ß2AdR with its vasodilator function in skeletal muscles. MMA activa-
tion may be enhanced by the poor bioenergetic situation of the skeletal
muscle contributing to vasoconstriction in the particular hemodynamic
situation of ME/CFS. Hence, compared with the healthy situation three
factors could act in concert to cause excessive vasoconstriction instead
of vasodilation with the onset of exercise in the upright position: ß2AdR
dysfunction, excessive baroreflex activation due to hypovolemia and
excessive MMA due to poor metabolic situation. This may stimulate the
postulated release of algesic vasodilators like bradykinin in skeletal
muscles as a compensatory vasodilator mechanism which may be ef-
fective to a certain extent in a compensatory manner to raise local
perfusion but excessive production of these vasodilators could lead to
the spillover into the systemic circulation. Various symptoms of ME/
CFS could be explained by the spillover of algesic vasodilators as
summarized in Table 5.
4.3. Orthostatic dysfunction (OD), orthostatic stress and the postural
tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
Typical ME/CFS symptoms can be provoked not only by increased
physical or cognitive activity, but also by orthostatic stress [6]. ME/CFS
is associated with POTS which manifests with symptoms of cerebral
hypoperfusion and excessive sympathoexcitation [81,117,118]. Ortho-
static dysfunction could be due to hypovolemia and preload failure via
the algesic vasodilators released from hypoxic muscles after spillover
into the arterial system causing renal hyperexcretion and microvascular
leakage. Fig. 1 shows the vicious cycle that could arise from these
disturbances. The hemodynamic situation when standing up will
strongly activate the sympathetic system to cause “orthostatic stress”.
Orthostatic intolerance (OI) may bind the patients to beds and wheel
chairs. Upright posture consistently aggravates ME/CFS symptoms even
in the absence of heart rate and blood pressure changes, often for days,
Table 3
Potential effects of bradykinin related to the vascular filling state.
1) Extravasation of intravascular fluid by increasing endothelial permeability
lowering intravascular volume. Vascular leakage induced by bradykinin may be
exaggerated by dysfunctional ß2AdR autoantibodies as it has been reported that
ß2AdR agonists reduce microvascular leakage induced by bradykinin in
experimental settings [84,90]. Prostaglandins increase the vascular permeability
induced by bradykinin [71]. Plasma albumin levels were increased in severe ME/
CFS in line with the assumption of enhanced microvascular leakage [91].
2) Renal actions of bradykinin: Bradykinin increases renal blood flow by its renal
vasodilator effect and inhibits sodium reabsorption in the distal tubule causing
renal hyperexcretion and hyperfunction (acting like a mild salidiuretic drug)
[92]. Indeed decreased creatinine and urea levels were found in patients with
severe ME/CFS in line with renal hyperemia supporting the idea of excessive
renal excretion as a cause of hypovolemia [91].
3) Inhibition of renin production: falling pressure in the afferent renal arteries
reduced sodium concentration in the distal tube and ß-adrenergic stimulation
(mainly ß1-adrenergic) are the main physiological stimuli for renin production.
The renal actions of bradykinin could explain the deficient renin activation and
the RAAS paradoxon of ME/CFS as it [96] increases renal blood flow and has
natriuretic and diuretic effects to annihilate the signals that otherwise stimulate
renin secretion [89, 92–96].
Table 4
Disturbed hemodynamic situation in ME/CFS: Cardiovascular causes.
A) Presumed mechanisms of preload failure in ME/CFS
• Hypovolemia
o Microvascular leakage by bradykinin (unleashed by ß2AdR dysfunction)
o Renal hyperexcretion caused by bradykinin and prostaglandins
▪Renal vasodilation
▪Inhibition of tubular sodium reabsorption
▪Inhibition of the signals for renin generation, low RAAS activity and low
aldosterone
• Venous pooling by venous dilation and potentially intestinal hypervolemia
B) Presumed mechanisms of muscular and cerebral misery perfusion in ME/CFS
• Preload failure as explained in A) leading to lower cardiac output
• Cardiac causes
o Cardiac hypotrophy (small hearts)
o Cardiac fibrosis in some patients impairing diastolic filling [100]
o Chronotropic incompetence and diminished inotropic component (due to
dysfunctional ß2AdR)
• Disturbances of the arterial system
o Impaired vasodilator activity due to endothelial dysfunction favoring alpha1-
adrenergic vasoconstriction
o Enhanced sympathetic tone and vasoconstriction due to hypovolemia, stress and
pain. Vascular remodeling by alpha1-adrenergic receptors (hypertrophy)?
o Steal effect for muscle perfusion due to spillover of vasodilators causing
vasodilation in other organs during exercise
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
4

consistent with orthostatic stress being a cause of PEM [6]. The in-
creased sympathetic tone while standing can cause muscular and cer-
ebral vasoconstriction to initiate the cascade of events outlined above
for other stressors. The synergistic effect of the simultaneous activation
of the baroreflex and the MAA in the early phase of exercise on vaso-
dilator/vasoconstrictor tone in skeletal muscle has been highlighted in
the paragraph above.
Due to the suspected dysfunction of ß2AdR heart rate may not even
rise
proportionally
to
sympathetic
activity
(“chronotropic
in-
competence”) so that the true extent of sympathetic activation and
alpha1-adrenergic vasoconstriction may be underestimated by taking
the rise in heart rate as a measure for sympathetic activation. An in-
teraction of hyperventilation induced hypocapnia with sympathetically
induced paradoxical cerebral vasoconstriction has been reported in a
study on the postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) [119]. In POTS,
vasoconstriction is most likely so effective that hypotension does not
occur any more. However, at this high level of vasoconstriction cerebral
vessels (and vessels of skeletal muscles) may excessively constrict,
perhaps favored by hypocapnia, to cause the typical symptoms of POTS
or to aggravate the symptoms of ME/CFS. Concerning the frequent
association of POTS and ME/CFS causality could be bidirectional. Pri-
mary severe orthostatic dysfunction could favor ME/CFS by orthostatic
stress as outlined above and, ME/CFS could aggravate orthostatic
dysfunction by causing preload failure.
5. Other possible mechanisms of vascular (endothelial)
dysfunction in ME/CFS
5.1. Polymorphisms of ß2AdR genes
A mutation (Gln27 mutation) was found associated with (adoles-
cent) chronic fatigue syndrome and a lower HRV was reported [26]. In
healthy adults, the Gln27 and the Arg16 mutations of this receptor are
associated with blunted regional limb vasodilation, reduced regional
and systemic vasodilation to sympathoexcitation, decreased ventricular
ejection fraction, cardiac output and stroke volume in line with what
has been explained for possible effects of autoantibodies against ß2AdR
throughout this manuscript [27]. In an orthostatic challenge the Arg16
variant was found associated with stronger increases in heart rate,
systemic vascular resistance and norepinephrine levels and with a de-
crease in cardiac index [28]. This mutant also showed stronger renal
sodium excretion after sodium loading having a potential impact on
preload [29]. This pattern of changes has the potential to favor the
development of orthostatic dysfunction and POTS. Is it already a mild
or asymptomatic form of the CV disturbances seen in ME/CFS?
5.2. The potential role of a high sympathetic tone and vascular (endothelial)
dysfunction in ME/CFS
According to heart rate variability studies cited above sympathetic
tone is chronically increased in ME/CFS. This could contribute to pa-
thophysiology of ME/CFS by acute and chronic effects. Acute effects
include a high vasoconstrictor sympathetic tone which in the presence
of endothelial dysfunction and dysfunctional vasodilator ß2AdR could
entail exaggerated vasoconstriction that is opposed by the metaboli-
cally stimulated release of algesic vasodilators for compensation
leading to the symptoms outlined above.
ME/CFS patients show signs of endothelial dysfunction [72,73].
Table 5
ME/CFS symptoms potentially explained by spillover of (hyper)algesic vaso-
dilators into the circulation.
Pain, hyperalgesia, flu-like symptoms: These could be explained by excessive
generation of algesic vasodilators in skeletal muscle and spillover into the
systemic circulation. In line with the assumption that hyperalgesic mediators are
excessively generated during exercise to enter the systemic circulation pain
threshold is decreased in ME/CFS after exercise (hyperalgesia) while it is
normally increased in healthy subjects (hypoalgesia) [103]. Quantitative sensory
testing demonstrated heat and mechanical hyperalgesia in CFS subjects [104].
Headache may arise from the overproduction of those inflammatory vasodilators.
Apart from releasing PGE2 and displaying direct algesic effects bradykinin
stimulates the release of substance P and cGRP from sensory nerve fibres
(referred to as neurogenic inflammation), recognized mediators of headache
[105]. Prostaglandins could contribute to CNS symptoms by fever, headache and
by hyperalgesia and by disturbing sleep (awakening effect of PGE2).
Sore lymph nodes: The feeling of sore lymph nodes can be explained by
microvascular leakage plus hyperalgesic action leading to painful distension of
lymph vessels.
Intestinal and bladder complaints: These can be explained by microvascular leakage
(edema) and vasodilation. Intestinal hypervolemia may not only divert blood
from skeletal muscles during exercise (steal effect) but contribute to preload
failure. Pain in intestinal organs may be explained by the spasmogenic and
hyperalgesic actions. Bronchi may be narrowed by by airway edema,
dysfunctional ß2AdR and spasmogenic action of bradykinin and prostaglandins
[106].
Mental stress: Mental stress may in the presence of vascular dysfunction and a high
sympathetic tone may cause vasoconstriction in skeletal muscles leading to the
release and spillover of algesic vasodilators to cause the typical symptoms.
Passive muscles may be particularly sensitive to vasoconstriction as the powerful
mechanisms that lead to functional hyperemia in working muscles are not
operative.
Mental fatigue and cognitive problems (brain fog): These may arise from reduced
cerebral blood flow (CBF) by excessive sympathetic vasoconstriction in the
presence of dysfunctional ß2AdR and vascular or endothelial dysfunction. ß-
adrenergic mechanisms are involved in the stimulation of cerebral blood flow
and endothelial function is important for CBF which should be impaired by
blockade of the M3-receptor that release NO from endothelial cells [54]. Brain
fog is a very typical complaint in ME/CFS [107]. Potential effects of bradykinin
on the blood brain barrier (BBB) should also be considered contributing to CNS
symptoms as by increasing microvavscular permeability bradykinin is able to
open the blood brain barrier (BBB) and to potentially raise intracranial pressure
[66,67].
A frequent complaint is that attention cannot be maintained for a longer time [108].
CBF has been found decreased in ME/CFS patients [109]. Higher CBF and heart
rate variability correlated with less severe symptoms [110]. A decrease in CBF
may not only impair cognitive function but also affect the motorcortex. This
could result in a slowing of movements and uncoordinated movements, which
are symptoms of ME/CFS, and fatigue. Significant inverse correlation was seen
between CBF and skeletal muscle pH at rest suggesting that mental fatigue and
muscular fatigue are related [111].
Paresthesia and burning: A subset of patients suffers from paresthesia and burning
mostly in feet and legs. A recent study shows that 40% of 160 patients with ME/
CFS with preload failure had evidence of small-fiber polyneuropathy on skin
biopsy which has also been found in FM [112]. To explain radicular pain in
fibromyalgia it was speculated that a higher cerebrospinal fluid pressure irritates
nerve fibres inside nerve root sheaths [113,114]. An increase in BBB-
permeability by bradykinin in ME/CFS could indeed cause an excessive
production of cerebrospinal fluid and also a higher pressure in the Remak-
bundles of unmyelinated fibres (internal compression) potentially affecting
perfusion while bradykinin and PGE2 stimulating exactly this type of nerve fibres
may simultaneously increase energy consumption. This could result in an
energetic deficit and chronic damage. Further there is evidence that
autoantibodies can cause small fiber neuropathy which is found in several
autoimmune diseases [115].
Sleep disturbances in ME/CFS: Unrefreshing sleep is a typical symptom of ME/CFS.
Although patients feel tired they are often unable to fall asleep. PGE2 has
awaking effects [75]. PGE2 release is stimulated by bradykinin and ischemic
muscles also release prostaglandins [71]. The influence of a potential opening of
the BBB by bradykinin on sleep should be considered. A new finding is a high
prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in ME/CFS although ME/CFS mainly
affects young women who are usually not concerned by OSA [116]. Upper
airway mucosal swelling resulting from microvascular leakage increases upper
airway resistance increasing the collapse inducing forces to put a higher burden
on the upper airway dilating skeletal muscles mainly innervated by the
hypoglossal nerve. Those muscles may be subject to fatigue and myalgia as the
other muscles in the body. Feeling of a sore throat in in the morning in the
absence of pharyngeal lesions (“sterile pharyngitis”) could be explained by
Table 5 (continued)
myalgic upper airway dilating muscles. Huge sympathetic surges occur in the
postapneic phase in OSA. In ME/CFS patients postapneic vasoconstriction may
even be stronger than in OSA patients with no ME/CFS due to vascular
dysfunction. OSA may strongly aggravate hypoxia in the brain, muscles and other
organs which could contribute to fatigue and cognitive dysfunction
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
5

MIAT, which has been found upregulated in PBMC of ME/CFS patients
could be an indicator for endothelial dysfunction as elevated MIAT le-
vels in cardiovascular diseases are associated with endothelial dys-
function [120]. Upregulated MIAT in endothelial cells in diabetes is
considered a prognostic marker for cardiac remodeling [121]. En-
dothelial dysfunction might be an important mechanism in ME/CFS by
which the vasodilator component of the (enhanced) sympathetic ac-
tivity may be impaired allowing vasoconstrictor mechanisms mainly
carried by alpha1-adrenergic activation to prevail in skeletal muscle
and brain. A possible cause are autoantibodies against vasodilator re-
ceptors such as ß2AdR and M3-muscarinergic receptors [122,123]. We
think that a chronically elevated sympathetic tone itself can lead to
endothelial and vascular dysfunction favoring vasoconstrictor influ-
ences.
Chronic
stress
induces
endothelial
dysfunction,
indeed
[124,125]. Continuous alpha1-adrenergic receptor stimulation causes
sensitization of vasoconstrictor mechanisms to calcium and induces
growth of VSCMs and adventitial fibroblasts so that the possibility of
vascular remodeling should be considered (media hypertrophy) which
may enhance the vasoconstrictor effect of the high sympathetic tone in
skeletal muscles [126].
A chronically elevated sympathetic tone may also lead to a differ-
ential desensitization of adrenergic receptor subtypes with the overall
effect that vasoconstrictor influences are increased. Desensitization of
β-adrenergic receptors occurs in heart failure due to chronically ele-
vated catecholamine levels [44]. The β2AdR, which is most relevant for
muscle and brain perfusion, shows the strongest endocytosis rate via β-
arrestin among the different adrenergic receptors causing desensitiza-
tion [45]. By contrast, the β3-adrenergic receptor and the alpha1-
adrenergic receptor, which is the physiologically more relevant vaso-
constrictor alpha-adrenergic subtype, do not or only weakly interact
with β-arrestin. Altogether, vasodilator ß-adrenergic receptors show
stronger desensitization than vasoconstrictor alpha-adrenergic re-
ceptors. Desensitization of the ß2AdR may be the most relevant change
to ME/CFS. Altogether α1-adrenergic vasoconstriction favored by
chronic high sympathetic tone may lead to chronification of ME/CFS.
Table 6 gives an overview on possible causes of vascular dysfunction.
Finally, an increased vasoconstrictor tone from different mechan-
isms would increase the need for functional sympatholysis enhancing
the metabolically stimulated generation of algesic vasodilator that after
spillover into the systemic circulation cause hypovolemia and the
myriad of symptoms of ME/CFS.
5.3. The high prevalence of ME/CFS in patients with craniocervical and
atlantoaxial instability
Prevalence of ME/CFS is high in in patients with craniocervical and
atlantoaxial instability. When we retrospectively analyzed the history of
our patients craniocervical trauma or instability was reported in 24% of
a cohort of 133 ME/CFS patients. Hyperventilation occurs after whi-
plash injury [127]. Hyperventilation in the absence of excitation, hy-
poxia or hypercapnia could be induced by inappropriate stimulation of
chemoreceptors located in the carotid bodies. These act as the main
oxygen sensors in the body to mediate the hypoxic respiratory drive.
Their stimulation not only increases respiratory drive but also raises
sympathetic activity [128]. Since the carotid bodies are in close
proximity to the hypermobile cervical spine column it is reasonable to
consider the possibility that carotid bodies could be inappropriately
activated to stimulate respiration and to raise sympathetic tone (stress).
Although the mechanisms of such stimulation of the carotid body
chemoreceptors in craniocervical instability are totally unclear our first
speculation would be that the (separate) blood vessel system supplying
the carotid bodies could be affected - perhaps by distension or com-
pression by the hypermobile cervical spine column - leading to local
hypoxia in the carotid bodies despite normal systemic pO2. There may
be other causes for chemoreceptor hyperactivity or hypersensitivity
than craniocervical instability. For instance, patients suffering from
POTS had an increased peripheral chemoreflex in response to hypoxia,
which is usually associated with an increase in sympathetic activity, but
a decreased central sensitivity to CO2 [129]. Patients frequently report
shortness of breath despite normal pulmonary function [130]. In-
appropriate stimulation of peripheral chemoreceptors would induce
hyperventilation and cause the sensation of dyspnea despite normoxia
and normal pulmonary function. Hyperventilation would soon lower
pCO2 below the CO2-apneic threshold to induce central apneas which
would finally lead to systemic (true) hypoxia towards the end of the
apnea raising sympathetic tone again. Inappropriate stimulation of
peripheral chemoreceptors during sleep destabilizes breathing to favor
central and obstructive apneas which may be another cause for the high
prevalence of sleep apnea in ME/CFS patients as outlined above.
Above it has already been highlighted that hypocapnia, which
would be induced by inappropriate chemoreceptor stimulation, has
vasoconstrictor effects on the cerebral vasculature to lower cerebral
blood flow, a mechanism potentially involved in mental fatigue, brain
fog and POTS in ME/CFS, which supports sympathetically induced
Fig. 1. Presumed pathomechanisms of orthostatic intolerance in ME/CFS.
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
6

vasoconstriction. We would like to call the increase in sympathetic
activity that could arise from inappropriate carotid body stimulation
“chemoreceptor stress”. It is a potentially new stressor in patients with
ME/CFS that has to be added to the existing list of stressors which al-
ready includes physical, emotional, cognitive and orthostatic stress.
6. Conclusion
ß2AdR dysfunction may be an important risk factor in the patho-
physiology of ME/CFS potentially caused by dysfunctional auto-
antibodies to ß2AdR, polymorphisms and desensitization of ß2AdR by
(chronic) high sympathetic tone. High sympathetic tone in the presence
of endothelial or vascular dysfunction, to which dysfunctional ß2AdR
contribute, may lead to an excessive vasoconstrictor stimulus in skeletal
muscles, which is opposed by the metabolically stimulated generation
of endogenous algesic vasodilators in the process of functional sym-
patholysis. Metabolic stimulation of the generation of algesic vasodi-
lators is strongly favored by the poor background energetic situation in
skeletal muscle which is due to a still enigmatic metabolic disturbance
(probably a mitochondrial disturbance). Spillover of such excessively
generated algesic vasodilators into the circulation could explain the
unfavorable CV situation causing hypovolemia, inhibition of renin
production and preload failure further raising sympathetic (vasocon-
strictor) tone. The appearance of algesic vasodilators in the systemic
circulation may explain many of the enigmatic symptoms of ME/CFS
including pain, hyperalgesia, intestinal complaints, flu-like symptoms,
sore lymph nodes and others.
Funding
CS receives funding from the Weidenhammer Zoebele and Lost
Voices Foundation for education and research in ME/CFS.
Authors' contributions
KW and CS conceived the idea and wrote the manuscript. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
References
[1] Valdez AR, Hancock EE, Adebayo S, Kiernicki DJ, Proskauer D, Attewell JR, et al.
Estimating prevalence, demographics, and costs of ME/CFS using large scale
medical claims data and machine learning. Front Pediatr 2019;6:412. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fped.2018.00412.
[2] Bested AC, Marshall LM. Review of Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome: an evidence-based approach to diagnosis and management by clin-
icians. Rev Environ Health 2015;30:223–49. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2015-
0026.
[3] Clark JE, Fai Ng W, Watson S, Newton JL. The aetiopathogenesis of fatigue: un-
predictable, complex and persistent. Br Med Bull 2016;117:139–48.
[4] Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, Klimas NG, Broderick G, Mitchell
T, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis: international consensus criteria. J Intern Med
2011;270:327–38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011.02428.x.
[5] Keech A, Sandler CX, Vollmer-Conna U, Cvejic E, Lloyd AR, Barry BK. Capturing
the post-exertional exacerbation of fatigue following physical and cognitive chal-
lenge in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Psychosom Res
2015;79:537–49.
[6] Rowe PC, Fontaine KR, Lauver M, Jasion SE, Marden CL, Moni M, et al.
Neuromuscular strain increases symptom intensity in chronic fatigue syndrome.
PLoS One 2016;18(11):e0159386.
[7] Myhill S, Booth NE, McLaren-Howard J. Chronic fatigue syndrome and mi-
tochondrial dysfunction. Int J Clin Exp Med 2009;2:1–16.
[8] Rutherford G, Manning P, Newton JL. Understanding muscle dysfunction in
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Aging Res 2016;2016:2497348.
[9] Fluge Ø, Mella O, Bruland O, Risa K, Dyrstad SE, Alme K, et al. Metabolic profiling
indicates impaired pyruvate dehydrogenase function in myalgic encephalopathy/
chronic fatigue syndrome. JCI Insight 2016;1:e89376https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.
insight.89376.
[10] Hatziagelaki E, Adamaki M, Tsilioni I, Dimitriadis G, Theoharides TC. Myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome-metabolic disease or disturbed
homeostasis? J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2018;367:155–67. https://doi.org/10.1124/
jpet.118.250845.
[11] Vermeulen RCW, Kurk RM, Visser FC, Sluiter W, Scholte HR. Patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome performed worse than controls in a controlled repeated exercise
study despite a normal oxidative phosphorylation capacity. J Transl Med
2010;8:93. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5876-8-93.
[12] Keller BA, Pryor JL, Giloteaux. Inability of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome patients to reproduce VO(2)peak indicates functional impair-
ment. J Transl Med 2014;12:104. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5876-12-104.
[13] Germain A, Ruppert D, Levine SM, Hanson MR. Metabolic profiling of a myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome discovery cohort reveals dis-
turbances in fatty acid and lipid metabolism. Mol Biosyst 2017;13:371–9.
[14] Jones DE, Hollingsworth KG, Jakovljevic DG, Fattakhova G, Pairman J, Blamire
AM, et al. Loss of capacity to recover from acidosis on repeat exercise in chronic
fatigue syndrome: a case-control study. Eur J Clin Invest 2012;42:186–94.
[15] Chaudhuri A, Behan PO. In vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy in chronic fa-
tigue syndrome. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2004;71:181–3.
[16] Tomas C, Newton J. Metabolic abnormalities in chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic
encephalomyelitis: a mini-review. Biochem Soc Trans 2018;46:547–53.
[17] Lengert N, Drossel B. In silico analysis of exercise intolerance in myalgic en-
cephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Biophys Chem 2015;202:21–31.
[18] Brown AE, Dibnah B, Fisher E, Newton JL, Walker M. Pharmacological activation
of AMPK and glucose uptake in cultured human skeletal muscle cells from patients
with ME/CFS. Biosci Res 2018;38. https://doi.org/10.1042/BSR20180242. pii:
BSR20180242.
[19] Sotzny F, Blanco J, Capelli E, Castro-Marrero J, Steiner S, Murovska M, et al.
European network on, M. C. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
- evidence for an autoimmune disease. Autoimmun Rev 2018;17:601–9.
[20] Blomberg J, Gottfries CG, Elfaitouri A, Rizwan M, Rosén A. Infection elicited au-
toimmunity and Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: an ex-
planatory model. Front Immunol 2018;9:229. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.
2018.00229.
[21] Cabral-Marques O, Marques A, Giil LM, De Vito R, Rademacher J, Günther J, et al.
GPCR-specific autoantibody signatures are associated with physiological and pa-
thological immune homeostasis. Nat Commun 2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-018-07598-9.
[22] Loebel M, Grabowski P, Heidecke H, Bauer S, Hanitsch LG, Wittke K, et al.
Antibodies to β adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in patients with
chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 2016;52:32–9.
[23] Scheibenbogen C, Loebel M, Freitag H, Krueger A, Bauer S, Antelmann M, et al.
Immunoadsorption to remove ß2 adrenergic receptor antibodies in chronic fatigue
syndrome CFS/ME. PLoS One 2018;13:e0193672https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0193672.
[24] Tanaka S, Kuratsune H, Hidaka Y, Hakariya Y, Tatsumi KI, Takano T, et al.
Autoantibodies against muscarinic cholinergic receptor in chronic fatigue syn-
drome. Int J Mol Med 2003;12:225–30.
[25] Yamamoto S, Ouchi Y, Nakatsuka D, Tahara T, Mizuno K, Tajima S, et al.
Reduction of [11C](+)3-MPB binding in brain of chronic fatigue syndrome with
serum autoantibody against muscarinic cholinergic receptor. PLoS One
2012;7:e51515.
Table 6
Possible causes or mechanisms of vascular (endothelial) dysfunction in ME/CFS.
Mechanism
Detailed effects
Role in disease course
Autoantibodies against ß2AdR and M3 acetylcholine receptors
endothelial dysfunction allowing alpha1-adrenergic vasoconstrictor
input to predominate
Predisposing factor
Polymorphisms of ß2AdR
diminished ß2AdR function and vasodilator effect
Predisposing factor
High sympathetic tone/chronic stress leading to enhanced vaso-
constrictor efficiency
• Sensitization to calcium (e.g. via Rho-kinase)
• ß2AdR show strong desensitization while alpha1-adrenergic
receptors hardly desensitize
• Development of endothelial dysfunction
• Vascular remodeling (media hypertrophy) via alpha1-adrenergic
activation?
Predisposing and perpetuating
factor
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
7

[26] Sommerfeldt L, Portilla H, Jacobsen L, Gjerstad J, Wyller VB. Polymorphisms of
adrenergic cardiovascular control genes are associated with adolescent chronic
fatigue syndrome. Acta Paediatr 2011;100:293–8.
[27] Eisenach JH, Wittwer ED. Beta-Adrenoceptor gene variation and intermediate
physiological traits: prediction of distant phenotype. Exp Physiol 2010;95:757–64.
https://doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.2009.048330.
[28] Wittwer ED, Liu Z, Warner ND, Schroeder DR, Nadeau AM, Allen AR, et al. β-1 and
β-2 adrenergic receptor polymorphism and association with cardiovascular re-
sponse to orthostatic screening. Auton Neurosci 2011;164:89–95. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.autneu.2011.07.004.
[29] Snyder EM, Turner ST, Joyner MJ, Eisenach JH, Johnson BD. The Arg16Gly
polymorphism of the beta2-adrenergic receptor and the natriuretic response to
rapid saline infusion in humans. J Physiol 2006;574(Pt 3):947–54.
[30] Wyller VB, Saul JP, Walløe L, Thaulow E. Sympathetic cardiovascular control
during orthostatic stress and isometric exercise in adolescent chronic fatigue
syndrome. Eur J Appl Physiol 2008;102:623–32.
[31] De Becker P, Dendale P, De Meirleir K, Campine I, Vandenborne K, Hagers Y.
Autonomic testing in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Am J Med
1998;105:22S–6S.
[32] Orjatsalo M, Alakuijala A, Partinen M. Autonomic nervous system functioning
related to nocturnal sleep in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome compared to
tired controls. J Clin Sleep Med 2018;14:163–71.
[33] Rimes KA, Lievesley K, Chalder T. Stress vulnerability in adolescents with chronic
fatigue syndrome: experimental study investigating heart rate variability and skin
conductance responses. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2017;58:851–8.
[34] Martínez-Martínez LA, Mora T, Vargas A, Fuentes-Iniestra M, Martínez-Lavín M.
Sympathetic nervous system dysfunction in fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syn-
drome, irritable bowel syndrome, and interstitial cystitis: a review of case-control
studies. J Clin Rheumatol 2014;20:146–50.
[35] Van Cauwenbergh D, Nijs J, Kos D, Van Weijnen L, Struyf F, Meeus M.
Malfunctioning of the autonomic nervous system in patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome: a systematic literature review. Eur J Clin Invest 2014;44:516–26.
[36] Meeus M, Goubert D, De Backer F, Struyf F, Hermans L, Coppieters I, et al. Heart
rate variability in patients with fibromyalgia and patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2013;43:279–87.
[37] Frith J, Zalewski P, Klawe JJ, Pairman J, Bitner A, Tafil-Klawe M, et al. Impaired
blood pressure variability in chronic fatigue syndrome–a potential biomarker.
QJM 2012;105:831–8.
[38] Beaumont A, Burton AR, Lemon J, Bennett BK, Lloyd A, Vollmer-Conna U.
Reduced cardiac vagal modulation impacts on cognitive performance in chronic
fatigue syndrome. PLoS One 2012;7:e49518.
[39] Burton AR, Rahman K, Kadota Y, Lloyd A, Vollmer-Conna U. Reduced heart rate
variability predicts poor sleep quality in a case-control study of chronic fatigue
syndrome. Exp Brain Res 2010;204:71–8.
[40] Stewart JM. Autonomic nervous system dysfunction in adolescents with postural
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome is characterized
by attenuated vagal baroreflex and potentiated sympathetic vasomotion. Pediatr
Res 2000;48:218–26.
[41] Yataco A, Talo H, Rowe P, Kass DA, Berger RD, Calkins H. Comparison of heart rate
variability in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and controls. Clin Auton Res
1997;7:293–7.
[42] Sisto SA, Tapp W, Drastal S, Bergen M, DeMasi I, Cordero D, et al. Vagal tone is
reduced during paced breathing in patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome.
Clin Auton Res 1995;5:139–43.
[43] Jones DE, Hollingsworth KG, Taylor R, Blamire AM, Newton JL. Abnormalities in
pH handling by peripheral muscle and potential regulation by the autonomic
nervous system in chronic fatigue syndrome. J Intern Med 2010;267:394–401.
[44] Lohse MJ, Engelhardt S, Eschenhagen T. What is the role of beta-adrenergic sig-
naling in heart failure? Circ Res 2003;93:96–906.
[45] Cotecchia S, Stanasila L, Diviani D. Protein-protein interactions at the adrenergic
receptors. Curr Drug Targets 2012;13:15–27.
[46] Davenport TE, Lehnen M, Stevens SR, VanNess JM, Stevens J, Snell CR.
Chronotropic intolerance: an overlooked determinant of symptoms and activity
limitation in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome? Front Pediatr
2019;22(7):82. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2019.00082.
[47] Naschitz JE, Slobodin G, Sharif D, Fields M, Isseroff H, Sabo E, et al.
Electrocardiographic QT interval and cardiovascular reactivity in fibromyalgia
differ from chronic fatigue syndrome. Eur J Intern Med 2008;19:187–91. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2007.08.003.
[48] Wang H, Chen Y, Zhu H, Wang S, Zhang X, Xu D, et al. Increased response to β₂-
adrenoreceptor stimulation augments inhibition of IKr in heart failure ventricular
myocytes. PLoS One 2012;7:e46186https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0046186.
[49] Kalaria RN, Andorn AC, Tabaton M, Whitehouse PJ, Harik SI, Unnerstall JR.
Adrenergic receptors in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: increased beta 2-receptors
in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. J Neurochem 1989;53:1772–81.
[50] Kalaria RN, Stockmeier CA, Harik SI. Brain microvessels are innervated by locus
ceruleus noradrenergic neurons. Neurosci Lett 1989;13(97):203–8.
[51] Rang HP. Pharmacology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2003. p. 270. ISBN 0-
443-07145-4.
[52] Van Zwieten PA, Doods HN. Muscarinic receptors and drugs in cardiovascular
medicine. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 1995;9:159–67.
[53] Bruning TA, Hendriks MG, Chang PC, Kuypers EA, van Zwieten PA. In vivo
characterization of vasodilating muscarinic-receptor subtypes in humans. Circ Res
1994;74:912–9.
[54] Wirth KJ. Role of noradrenergic brain nuclei in the regulation of carotid artery
blood flow: pharmacological evidence from anesthetized pigs with Alpha-2 adre-
nergic receptor modulator drugs. J Alzheimers Dis 2018;66:407–19. https://doi.
org/10.3233/JAD-180340.
[55] Korthuis RJ. Skeletal muscle circulation. San Rafael (CA): Morgan & Claypool Life;
2011.
[56] Hellsten Y, Nyberg M, Jensen LG, Mortensen SP. Vasodilator interactions in ske-
letal muscle blood flow regulation. J Physiol 2012;590:6297–305.
[57] Thomas GD. Functional sympatholysis in hypertension. Auton Neurosci
2015;188:64–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2014.10.019.
[58] Tegeder L, Zimmermann J, Meller ST, Geisslinger G. Release of algesic substances
in human experimental muscle pain. Inflamm Res 2002;51:393–402.
[59] Linz W, Martorana PA, Wiemer G, Wirth K, Schölkens BA. Role of kinins in
myocardial ischemia. EXS. 1996;76:231–41.
[60] Staszewka-Barczak J, Ferreira SH, Vane JR. An excitatory nociceptive cardiac re-
flex elicited by bradykinin and potentiated by prostaglandins and myocardial
ischaemia. Cardiovasc Res 1976;10:314–27.
[61] Hashimoto K, Hirose M, Furukawa S, Hayakawa H, Kimura E. Changes in hemo-
dynamics and bradykinin concentration in coronary sinus blood in experimental
coronary artery occlusion. Jpn Heart J 1977;18:679–89.
[62] Linz W, Wiemer G, Schölkens BA. Role of kinins in the pathophysiology of myo-
cardial ischemia. In vitro and in vivo studies. Diabetes 1996;45 Suppl 1:S51–8.
[63] Koch M, Wendorf M, Dendorfer A, Wolfrum S, Schulze K, Spillmann F, et al.
Cardiac kinin level in experimental diabetes mellitus: role of kininases. Am J
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2003;285:H418–23.
[64] Pan HL, Chen SR, Scicli GM, Carretero OA. Cardiac interstitial bradykinin release
during ischemia is enhanced by ischemic preconditioning. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 2000;279:H116–21.
[65] Stebbins CL, Carretero OA, Mindroiu T, Longhurst JC. Bradykinin release from
contracting skeletal muscle of the cat. J Appl Physiol 1985;1990(69):1225–30.
[66] Abbott NJ. Inflammatory mediators and modulation of blood-brain barrier per-
meability. Cell Mol Neurobiol 2000;20:131–47.
[67] Schilling L, Wahl M. Mediators of cerebral edema. Adv Exp Med Biol
1999;474:123–41.
[68] Rueff A, Dray A. Sensitization of peripheral afferent fibres in the in vitro neonatal
rat spinal cord-tail by bradykinin and prostaglandins. Neuroscience
1993;54:527–35.
[69] Lang E, Novak A, Reeh PW, Handwerker HO. Chemosensitivity of fine afferents
from rat skin in vitro. J Neurophysiol 1990;63:887–901.
[70] Feng J, Anderson K, Liu Y, Singh AK, Ehsan A, Sellke FW. Cyclooxygenase 2
contributes to bradykinin-induced microvascular responses in peripheral arterioles
after cardiopulmonary bypass. J Surg Res 2017;218:246–52.
[71] Erol K, Sirmagul B, Kilic FS, Yigitaslan S, Dogan AE. The role of inflammation and
COX-derived prostanoids in the effects of bradykinin on isolated rat aorta and
urinary bladder. Inflammation 2012;35:420–8.
[72] Newton JL, Okonkwo O, Sutcliffe K, Seth A, Shin J, Jones DE. Symptoms of au-
tonomic dysfunction in chronic fatigue syndrome. QJM 2007;100:519–26.
[73] Scherbakov N, Szklarski M, Hartwig J, Sotzny F, Lorenz S, Meyer A, et al.
Peripheral endothelial dysfunction in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome CFS/ME. ESC
Heart Failure, in revision. 2020.
[74] Ylikorkala O, Dawood MY. New concepts in dysmenorrhea. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1978;130:833–47.
[75] Hayaishi O. Sleep-wake regulation by prostaglandins D2 and E2. J Biol Chem
1988;263:14593–6.
[76] Boneva RS, Lin JS, Wieser F, Nater UM, Ditzen B, Taylor RN, et al. Endometriosis
as a comorbid condition in chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS): secondary analysis of
data from a CFS case-control study. Front Pediatr 2019;7:195. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fped.2019.00195.
[77] Hollingsworth KG, Hodgson T, Macgowan GA, Blamire AM, Newton JL. Impaired
cardiac function in chronic fatigue syndrome measured using magnetic resonance
cardiac tagging. J Intern Med 2012;271:264–70.
[78] Miwa K, Fujita M. Cardiovascular dysfunction with low cardiac output due to a
small heart in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Intern Med
2009;48:1849–54.
[79] Tomas C, Finkelmeyer A, Hodgson T, MacLachlan L, MacGowan GA, Blamire AM,
et al. Elevated brain natriuretic peptide levels in chronic fatigue syndrome as-
sociate with cardiac dysfunction: a case control study. Open Heart
2017;4:e000697.
[80] Newton JL, Finkelmeyer A, Petrides G, Frith J, Hodgson T, Maclachlan L, et al.
Reduced cardiac volumes in chronic fatigue syndrome associate with plasma vo-
lume but not length of disease: a cohort study. Open Heart
2016;3:e000381https://doi.org/10.1136/openhrt-2015-000381.
[81] Miwa K. Cardiac dysfunction and orthostatic intolerance in patients with myalgic
encephalomyelitis and a small left ventricle. Heart Vessels 2015;30:484–9.
[82] Hurwitz BE, Coryell VT, Parker M, Martin P, Laperriere A, Klimas NG, et al.
Chronic fatigue syndrome: illness severity, sedentary lifestyle, blood volume and
evidence of diminished cardiac function. Clin Sci (Lond) 2009;118:125–35.
[83] Systrom D. National Institutes of Health: Accelerating Research on Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME / CFS) Meeting. Meeting
Information. 4.–5. April 2019. 2019.
[84] Mullins RJ, Malias MA, Hudgens RW. Isoproterenol inhibits the increase in mi-
crovascular membrane permeability produced by bradykinin. J Trauma
1989;29:1053–63.
[85] Szabó G, Magyar Z. Effect of histamine and bradykinin on lymph and tissue fluid
composition in the rabbit hindlimb: evidence for two compartments in tissue fluid.
Acta Physiol Acad Sci Hung 1982;59:15–27.
[86] Boneva RS, Decker MJ, Maloney EM, Lin JM, Jones JF, Helgason HG, et al. Higher
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
8

heart rate and reduced heart rate variability persist during sleep in chronic fatigue
syndrome: a population-based study. Auton Neurosci 2007;137:94–101.
[87] Miwa K. Down-regulation of renin-aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone systems
in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. J Cardiol
2017;69:684–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjcc.2016.06.003.
[88] De Lorenzo F, Hargreaves J, Kakkar VV. Pathogenesis and management of delayed
orthostatic hypotension in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Auton Res
1997;7:185–90.
[89] Sadowski J, Badzynska B. Intrarenal vasodilator systems: NO, prostaglandins and
bradykinin. An integrative approach. J Physiol Pharmacol 2008;59 Suppl
9:105–99.
[90] Svensjö E, Persson CG, Rutili G. Inhibition of bradykinin induced macromolecular
leakage from post-capillary venules by a beta2-adrenoreceptor stimulant, terbu-
taline. Acta Physiol Scand 1977;101:504–6.
[91] Nacul L, de Barros B, Kingdon CC, Cliff JM, Clark TG, Mudie K, et al. Clinical
Pathology abnormalities in people with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome (ME/CFS) from an analytic cross-sectional study. Diagnostics
2019;10(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics9020041. pii: E41.
[92] Katori M, Majima M. Role of the renal kallikrein-kinin system in the development
of hypertension. Immunopharmacology 1997;36:237–42.
[93] Rhaleb NE, Yang XP, Carretero OA. The kallikrein-kinin system as a regulator of
cardiovascular and renal function. Compr Physiol 2011;1:971–93.
[94] Hébert RL, Regoli D, Xiong H, Breyer MD, Plante GE. Bradykinin B2 type receptor
activation regulates fluid and electrolyte transport in the rabbit kidney. Peptides
2005;26:1308–16.
[95] Wang D, Yoshida H, Song Q, Chao L, Chao J. Enhanced renal function in brady-
kinin B(2) receptor transgenic mice. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
2000;278:F484–91.
[96] Marceau F, Regoli D. Bradykinin receptor ligands: therapeutic perspectives. Nat
Rev Drug Discov 2004;3:845–52.
[97] Kaplan AP. Chem Immunol allergy. The bradykinin-forming cascade: a historical
perspective. Chem Immunol Allergy 2014;100:205–13.
[98] Joseph K, Tholanikunnel BG, Kaplan AP. Cytokine and estrogen stimulation of
endothelial cells augments activation of the prekallikrein-high molecular weight
kininogen complex: implications for hereditary angioedema. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2017;140:170–6.
[99] Bönner G, Preis S, Schunk U, Wagmann M, Chrosch R, Toussaint C. Effect of
bradykinin on arteries and veins in systemic and pulmonary circulation. J
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1992;20(Suppl. 9):S21–7.
[100] Olimulder MA, Galjee MA, Wagenaar LJ, van Es J, van der Palen J, Visser FC, et al.
Chronic fatigue syndrome in women assessed with combined cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging. Neth Heart J 2016;24:709–16.
[101] Kaur J, Krishnan AC, Senador D, Alvarez A, Hanna HW, O’Leary DS. Altered ar-
terial baroreflex-muscle metaboreflex interaction in heart failure. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 2018;315:H1383–92. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00338.
2018.
[102] Roberto S, Milia R, Doneddu A, Pinna V, Palazzolo G, Serra S, et al. Hemodynamic
abnormalities during muscle metaboreflex activation in patients with type 2 dia-
betes mellitus. J Appl Physiol 1985;2018(126):444–53. https://doi.org/10.1152/
japplphysiol.00794.2018.
[103] Whiteside A, Hansen S, Chaudhuri A. Exercise lowers pain threshold in chronic
fatigue syndrome. Pain 2004;109:497–9.
[104] Staud R, Mokthech M, Price DD, Robinson ME. Evidence for sensitized fatigue
pathways in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Pain 2015;156:750–9.
https://doi.org/10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000110.
[105] Geppetti P, Nassini R, Materazzi S, Benemei S. The concept of neurogenic in-
flammation. BJU Int 2008;101(Suppl. 3):2–6.
[106] Wirth KJ, Gehring D, Schölkens BA. Effect of hoe 140 on bradykinin-induced
bronchoconstriction in anesthetized Guinea pigs. Am Rev Respir Dis
1993;148:702–6.
[107] Ocon AJ. Caught in the thickness of brain fog: exploring the cognitive symptoms of
chronic fatigue syndrome. Front Physiol 2013;4:63. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2013.00063.
[108] Cvejic E, Birch R. Vollmer-Conna U cognitive dysfunction in chronic fatigue syn-
drome: a review of recent evidence. Curr Rheumatol Rep 2016;18:24. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11926-016-0577-9.
[109] Yoshiuchi K, Farkas J, Natelson BH. Patients with chronic fatigue syndrome have
reduced absolute cortical blood flow. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging 2006;26:83–6.
[110] Boissoneault J, Letzen J, Robinson M, Staud R. Cerebral blood flow and heart rate
variability predict fatigue severity in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome.
Brain Imaging Behav 2019;13:789–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11682-018-
9897-x.
[111] He J, Hollingsworth KG, Newton JL, Blamire AM. Cerebral vascular control is
associated with skeletal muscle pH in chronic fatigue syndrome patients both at
rest and during dynamic stimulation. Neuroimage Clin 2013;2:168–73. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2012.12.006.
[112] Oaklander AL. National Institutes of Health: accelerating research on myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) meeting. Meeting in-
formation. 4.–5. April 2019. 2019.
[113] Hulens M, Rasschaert R, Dankaerts W, Stalmans I, Vansant G, Bruyninckx F. Spinal
fluid evacuation may provide temporary relief for patients with unexplained
widespread pain and fibromyalgia. Med Hypotheses 2018;118:55–8.
[114] Wostyn P, De Deyn PP. The putative glymphatic signature of chronic fatigue
syndrome: a new view on the disease pathogenesis and therapy. Med Hypotheses
2018;118:142–5.
[115] Oaklander AL. Immunotherapy prospects for painful small-fiber sensory neuro-
pathies and Ganglionopathies. Neurotherapeutics 2016;13:108–17. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13311-015-0395-1.
[116] Pajediene E, Bileviciute-Ljungar I, Friberg D. Sleep patterns among patients with
chronic fatigue: a polysomnography-based study. Clin Respir J 2018;12:1389–97.
https://doi.org/10.1111/crj.12667.
[117] Raj SR, Robertson D. Blood volume perturbations in the postural tachycardia
syndrome. Am J Med Sci 2007;334:57–60.
[118] Benarroch EE. Postural tachycardia syndrome: a heterogeneous and multifactorial
disorder. Mayo Clin Proc 2012;87:1214–25.
[119] Jordan J, Shannon JR, Black BK, Paranjape SY, Barwise J, Robertson D. Raised
cerebrovascular resistance in idiopathic orthostatic intolerance: evidence for
sympathetic vasoconstriction. Hypertension 1998;32:699–704.
[120] Yang CA, Bauer S, Ho YC, Sotzny F, Chang JG, Scheibenbogen C. The expression
signature of very long non-coding RNA in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fa-
tigue syndrome. J Transl Med 2018;16:231. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-018-
1600-x.
[121] De Gonzalo-Calvo D, Kenneweg F, Bang C, Toro R, van der Meer RW, Rijzewijk LJ,
et al. Circulating long-non coding RNAs as biomarkers of left ventricular diastolic
function and remodelling in patients with well-controlled type 2 diabetes. Sci Rep
2016;6:37354.
[122] Abdelkrim MA, Leonetti D, Montaudon E, Chatagnon G, Gogny M, Desfontis JC,
et al. Antibodies against the second extracellular loop of β₁-adrenergic receptors
induce endothelial dysfunction in conductance and resistance arteries of the
Wistar rat. Int Immunopharmacol 2014;19:308–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
intimp.2014.01.029.
[123] Liu X, Tan W, Liu Y, Lin G, Xie C. The role of the β2 adrenergic receptor on
endothelial progenitor cells dysfunction of proliferation and migration in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Expert Opin Ther Targets
2013;17:485–500. https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.2013.773975.
[124] Burrage E, Marshall KL, Santanam N, Chantler PD. Cerebrovascular dysfunction
with stress and depression. Brain Circ 2018;4:43–53. https://doi.org/10.4103/bc.
bc_6_18.
[125] Kershaw KN, Lane-Cordova AD, Carnethon MR, Tindle HA, Liu K. Chronic stress
and endothelial dysfunction: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (MESA). Am
J Hypertens 2017;30:75–80.
[126] Zhang H, Faber JE. Trophic effect of norepinephrine on arterial intima-media and
adventitia is augmented by injury and mediated by different alpha1-adrenoceptor
subtypes. Circ Res 2001;89:815–22.
[127] Fischer AJ, Huygen PL, Folgering HT, Verhagen WI, Theunissen EJ. Vestibular
hyperreactivity and hyperventilation after whiplash injury. J Neurol Sci
1995;132:35–43.
[128] Iturriaga R. Carotid body ablation: a new target to address central autonomic
dysfunction. Curr Hypertens Rep 2018;20:53. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11906-
018-0849-z.
[129] Taneja I, Medow MS, Clarke DA, Ocon AJ, Stewart JM. Baroreceptor unloading in
postural tachycardia syndrome augments peripheral chemoreceptor sensitivity
and decreases central chemoreceptor sensitivity. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2011;301:H173–9. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.01211.2010.
[130] Ravindran M, Adewuyi O, Zheng Y, Rayhan RU, Le U, Timbol C, et al. Dyspnea in
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS): comparison of two prospective cross-sectional
studies. Global J Health Sci 2012;5:94–110. https://doi.org/10.5539/gjhs.
v5n2p94.
K. Wirth and C. Scheibenbogen
Autoimmunity Reviews 19 (2020) 102527
9
